













Handle-based Object Events Reference

















1
Handle-based Object Events Reference


Events are run-time conditions that cause the ABL Virtual Machine (AVM) to respond by executing specified ABL code or by activating certain system behaviors. Events can occur directly as a result of ABL, user, or other external actions that affect the application. However events occur, the resulting executed code or activated
behavior is referred to as event driven.
There are a number of factors that determine how ABL interprets events. The most important factor is the type of widget or handle receiving the event. Some widget types have default system actions in response to certain events. For example, the default system action for the A event on a fill-in widget is to insert the letter A into the fill-in at the current cursor location; however, there is no default system action for the A event on a button widget.
Different widget attribute settings determine how ABL interprets and prioritizes events. If you enable a widget for direct manipulation, direct manipulation events take priority over all other events. For example, if you write a trigger for a CHOOSE event and another for a SELECT event on a selectable widget, the AVM only executes the SELECT event trigger when you click on that widget.
This section describes the following topics for user-interface events only:
• Introduction to ABL events on page 4
• Event tables on page 6
You may consider an event to be supported for all interfaces, on all operating systems, and for SpeedScript unless otherwise indicated in the reference entry. User-interface events do not apply to SpeedScript programming.
For information on the following events, see the relevant documentation:
• DDE-NOTIFY — OpenEdge Programming Interfaces
• PROCEDURE-COMPLETE — ABL Reference

The following descriptions refer to both compile-time and run-time behavior, features that the language generally supports and determines at compile time and actions directed by using these features at run time. When describing compile-time features or actions, this section references ABL or the ABL compiler. When describing ABL or event-driven actions taken at run time, this section references the AVM.

For details, see the following topics:
• Introduction to ABL events
• Event tables



Introduction to ABL events
This section covers the following topics:
• Event priority on page 4
• Apply events on page 4
• Triggers and low-level keyboard events on page 5


Event priority
The priority of events is an important concept. For any mouse or keyboard action on a widget, ABL generates a single event. Thus, certain events take priority over others that are generated by the same keyboard or mouse action for the same widget. Without direct manipulation, the priority (first to last) of keyboard events is key label, key function, and then high-level widget events such as CHOOSE. The priority of mouse events is three-button, portable, and then high-level widget events. Within three-button and portable mouse events, low-level mouse events (up, down) take priority over high-level mouse events (click, double-click). For more information on keyboard and mouse event priority, see the topics on handling user input in OpenEdge Programming Interfaces.


Apply events
You can apply any event to any widget using the APPLY statement. Depending on the event-widget pair, the APPLY statement may or may not perform the default system action. Regardless of whether there is a default system action associated with an event-widget pair, you can write a trigger for the pair. The APPLY statement executes a trigger associated with an event-widget pair. If the event-widget pair has a default system action, that action occurs before or after the trigger executes, depending on the event.
The APPLY statement also serves as a communications/dispatch mechanism between procedures in an application. You can define a trigger for an event-procedure pair. For example:

To define a trigger for a procedure, specify any ABL event in an ON statement for a procedure handle. This capability allows you to encapsulate functionality in a procedure. To access that functionality, simply use the APPLY statement to apply the appropriate event to the handle of the procedure. For more information, see the APPLY statement reference entry.

When working with browse widgets, you can apply events to the browse widget and to a browse cell in the currently focused row. For example:

Since a browse cell is the intersection of a column and row, referencing the column name references the intersection of that column and the currently focused row.

Note: The most flexible technique for encapsulating functionality in a procedure is to define and call internal procedures of a persistent procedure.


Triggers and low-level keyboard events
Some low-level keyboard events cannot have associated triggers and maintain their default behavior at the same time. In general, if the AVM gets an event from the user interface system (UIS) that has a trigger associated with it, the AVM handles the default behavior and tells the UIS to ignore the event. This allows the AVM to
cancel the default behavior in response to a RETURN NO-APPLY invoked by the trigger.
However, there are some low-level keyboard events for which the AVM does not handle the default behavior. These include the cursor keys, especially. When the AVM gets one of these events with an associated trigger, it tells the UIS to ignore the event as usual, but because the AVM does not handle the default behavior for the event, the standard UIS behavior is lost, as well. Thus, a cursor key event (for example, CURSOR-UP) that has an associated trigger does not move the cursor.
Note that for many low-level events, such as mouse button and printable character events in fill-in fields and editors, the AVM does provide the default handling. Triggers on these events have no effect on the default event behavior unless they return NO-APPLY. The same is true of keyboard events that generate high-level functions, such as TAB and RETURN.
For those low-level, non-printable, keyboard events that are not handled by the AVM, do not associate triggers with them unless you do not want the default behavior of the event. For those low-level events that have no standard UIS behavior (such as, programmable function keys) triggers have no negative effects, and in fact, are very useful in defining a program action. In general, check any questionable low-level events in a test procedure both before and after associating triggers with them to see if any standard behavior is affected. An empty trigger block is sufficient to detect differences in behavior. For example:

For more information, see ON statement.


Event tables
The tables in this section describe user interface events, the user actions that generate the events, and widgets that have default behavior for the events. The term field-level widgets refers to any widgets that can be part of a field group in a frame: fill-ins, sliders, selection lists, toggle boxes, radio sets, editors, rectangles, images, text, buttons, combo boxes, and browse widgets. Frames, dialog boxes, windows, menus (including menu bars and pop-up menus), sub-menus, and menu items can also receive events. Note that there is frequently a distinction made between a browse widget and a single cell in an updateable browse. For the most part, a browse cell behaves as a fill-in widget.
The event tables in this section describe the following kinds of events:
• Keyboard events on page 6
• Mouse events on page 10
• High-level widget events on page 12
• Direct manipulation events on page 17
• Developer events on page 20
• Socket events on page 21
• ProDataSet events on page 22


Keyboard events
ABL makes all keyboard actions available as events that you can specify by either key label or key function. You can write triggers for these keyboard events, and associate these triggers with any field-level widget that receives input focus. For a complete list of key label and key function names, and information on how to use them, see the topics on handling user input in OpenEdge Programming Interfaces.
Keyboard events have default effects depending on the widget that receives the event. For example, the "A" key label event displays an uppercase "A" in a fill-in or editor widget, but has no default effect when applied to a button. ABL organizes some key function events into several classes that have default effects on selected groups of widgets. ABL also provides special keyboard events to write default triggers on classes of keys. You can use these default events to write a trigger for all keys in a particular class for which you have not defined a key label or key function event trigger.

Main classes of key function events
ABL supports three main classes of key function events:
• Universal key function events — Apply to all user-interface widgets except menus, submenus, and menu items
• Navigation key function events — Apply to those field-level widgets that can receive focus
• Field editing key function events — Apply to fill-ins and browse cells

Universal key function events
The following table describes universal key function events.

Table 1: Universal key function events

EventAffected widgetsAVM actionBELLAll except control container, menu, menu item, and submenuTrigger dependent (typically used to execute the BELL statement).END-ERRORAll except menu, menu item, and submenuFor the first input operation of the program, raise the ENDKEY condition. For subsequent input operations, raise the ERROR condition.ENDKEYAll except menu, menu item, and submenuRaise the ENDKEY condition.ERRORAll except control container, menu, menu item, and submenuRaise the ERROR condition.GOAll except menu, menu item, and submenuSubmit the input values for this frame.HELPAll except menu, menu item, and submenuInvoke application help.
Navigation key function events
The following table describes navigation key function events.
Table 2: Navigation key function events

EventAffected widgetsAVM actionBACK-TABBrowse, browse cell, button, combo box, control container, editor, fill-in, radio set, selection list, slider, toggle boxMove focus to the previous widget in the tab order within the current frame family.CURSOR-DOWN DOWNBrowse, browse cell, button, combo box, control container, editor, fill-in, radio set, selection list, slider, toggle boxIn a Windows GUI, move focus vertically to the next cell in a browse column, or to the next row of a browse widget when no cell is enabled. In the bottom-most browse cell or row, do not change focus. All other widgets provide no default AVM action.
In character mode, move focus vertically down in the widget. If the cursor is in the bottom-most position of a widget, move focus to the first character position of the next widget below the current widget in the frame family. In the bottom-most position of the bottom-most widget in the frame family, do not change focus.

EventAffected widgetsAVM actionCURSOR-LEFT LEFTBrowse, browse cell, button, combo box, control container, editor, fill-in, radio set, selection list, slider, toggle boxIn a Windows GUI, move focus to the previous character position in the current cell of a browse widget. In the first
character position of the cell, do not change focus. All other widgets provide no default AVM action.
In character mode, move focus to the previous character position to the left in the current widget. In the left-most
character position of the widget, move focus to the first character position of the next widget to the left within the frame, or if the current widget is the left-most widget in the frame, do not change focus.CURSOR-RIGHT RIGHTBrowse, browse cell, button, combo box, control container, editor, fill-in, radio set, selection list, slider, toggle boxIn a Windows GUI, move focus to the next character position in the current cell of a browse widget. In the last character position of the cell, do not change focus. All other widgets provide no default AVM action.
In character mode, move focus to the next character position to the right in the current widget. In the right-most character position of the widget, move focus to the first character position of the next widget to the right within the frame, or if the current widget is the right-most widget in the frame, do not change focus.CURSOR-UP UPBrowse, browse cell, button, combo box, control container, editor, fill-in, radio set, selection list, slider, toggle boxIn a Windows GUI, move focus vertically to the previous cell in a browse column, or to the previous row of a browse widget when no cell is enabled. In the top-most browse cell or row, do not change focus. All other widgets provide no default AVM action.
In character mode, move focus vertically up in the widget. If the cursor is in the top-most position of a widget, move focus to the first character position of the next widget above the current widget in the frame family. In the top-most position of the top-most widget in the frame family, do not change focus.NEXT-FRAMEBrowse, browse cell, button, combo box, editor, fill-in, radio set, selection list, slider, toggle boxMove focus to the next frame parented by the active window.

EventAffected widgetsAVM actionPREV-FRAMEBrowse, browse cell, button, combo box, editor, fill-in, radio set, selection list, slider, toggle boxMove focus to previous frame parented by the active window.TABBrowse, browse cell, button, combo box, control container, editor, fill-in, radio set, selection list, slider, toggle boxMove focus to the next widget in the tab order within the current frame family.
Field editing key function events
The following table describes field editing key function events.
Table 3: Field editing key function events

EventAffected widgetsAVM actionBACKSPACEFill-in, browse cellDelete one character to the left.CLEARFill-in, browse cellClear the current field value (character interfaces only).DELETE-CHARACTERFill-in, browse cellDelete one character to the right.RECALLFill-in, browse cellRestore the field to its value when it was last enabled.RETURNFill-in, browse cellDefault behavior is different for character and graphical interfaces and dependent on the
DATA-ENTRY-RETURN attribute of the SESSION handle.
Default keyboard events
ABL provides two keyboard events that you can use to write default triggers. The following table describes these events.
Table 4: Default keyboard events

EventAffected widgetsMeaningANY-KEYBrowse, browse cell, button, combo box, editor, fill-in, radio set, selection list, slider, toggle boxExecutes for any keyboard event for which the user has not defined a specific trigger.ANY-PRINTABLEBrowse, browse cell, button, combo box, editor, fill-in, radio set, selection list, slider, toggle boxExecutes for any keyboard event that normally produces a printable character.

Mouse events
ABL supports two types of mouse events—portable and three-button events. You can use portable mouse events to associate triggers with logical actions of any mouse. You can use the three-button mouse events to associate triggers with specific physical actions of a three-button mouse.
The following tables reference portable mouse buttons for portable mouse events and physical mouse buttons for three-button mouse events. For more information on the mapping between portable and physical mouse buttons and how the AVM processes mouse events, see the topics on handling user input in OpenEdge Programming Interfaces.

Portable mouse events
The following table lists the mouse events that apply to all mice, no matter how the buttons are configured.
Table 5: Portable mouse events

EventUser actionAffected widgetsAVM actionMOUSE-SELECT-DOWNPress the mouse SELECT button.AllTrigger dependentMOUSE-SELECT-UPRelease the pressed mouse SELECT button.AllTrigger dependentMOUSE-SELECT-CLICKPress and release the mouse SELECT button.AllTrigger dependentMOUSE-SELECT-DBLCLICKPress and release the mouse SELECT button twice.AllTrigger dependentMOUSE-MENU-DOWNPress the mouse MENU button.AllTrigger dependentMOUSE-MENU-UPRelease the pressed mouse MENU button.AllTrigger dependentMOUSE-MENU-CLICKPress and release the mouse MENU button.AllTrigger dependentMOUSE-MENU-DBLCLICKPress and release the mouse MENU button twice.AllTrigger dependentMOUSE-EXTEND-DOWNPress the mouse EXTEND button.AllTrigger dependentMOUSE-EXTEND-UPRelease the pressed mouse EXTEND button.AllTrigger dependentMOUSE-EXTEND-CLICKPress and release the mouse EXTEND button.AllTrigger dependentMOUSE-EXTEND-DBLCLICKPress and release the mouse EXTEND button twice.AllTrigger dependent

EventUser actionAffected widgetsAVM actionMOUSE-MOVE-DOWNPress the mouse MOVE button.


Note: In Windows, a
MOUSE-SELECT-DOWN trigger
defined for the same widget takes priority over
MOUSE-MOVE-DOWN.AllTrigger dependentMOUSE-MOVE-UPRelease the pressed mouse MOVE button.
In Windows, a
MOUSE-SELECT-UP trigger defined for the same widget takes priority over MOUSE-MOVE-UP.AllTrigger dependentMOUSE-MOVE-CLICKPress and release the mouse MOVE button.


Note: In Windows, a
MOUSE-SELECT-CLICK trigger
defined for the same widget takes priority over
MOUSE-MOVE-CLICK.AllTrigger dependentMOUSE-MOVE-DBLCLICKPress and release the mouse MOVE button twice.


Note: In Windows, a MOUSE-SELECT-DBLCLICK
trigger defined for the same widget takes priority over
MOUSE-MOVE-DBLCLICK.AllTrigger dependent
Three-button mouse events
The following table lists the mouse events associated with physical mouse buttons.
Table 6: Three-button mouse events

EventUser actionAffected widgetsAVM actionLEFT-MOUSE-DOWNPress the left mouse button.AllTrigger dependent

EventUser actionAffected widgetsAVM actionLEFT-MOUSE-UPRelease the pressed left mouse button.AllTrigger dependentLEFT-MOUSE-CLICKPress and release the left mouse button.AllTrigger dependentLEFT-MOUSE-DBLCLICKPress and release the left mouse button twice.AllTrigger dependentRIGHT-MOUSE-DOWNPress the right mouse button.AllTrigger dependentRIGHT-MOUSE-UPRelease the pressed right mouse button.AllTrigger dependentRIGHT-MOUSE-CLICKPress and release the right mouse button.AllTrigger dependentRIGHT-MOUSE-DBLCLICKPress and release the right mouse button twice.AllTrigger dependentMIDDLE-MOUSE-DOWNPress the middle mouse button.AllTrigger dependentMIDDLE-MOUSE-UPRelease the pressed middle mouse button.AllTrigger dependentMIDDLE-MOUSE-CLICKPress and release the middle mouse button.AllTrigger dependentMIDDLE-MOUSE-DBLCLICKPress and release the middle mouse button twice.AllTrigger dependent
High-level widget events
The following table lists high-level widget events. These are events generated by mouse or keyboard actions that perform high-level operations on a widget, such as entering a fill-in, choosing a button, or displaying a menu. Unless noted in the AVM Action column, triggers on these events execute before the AVM applies the event. If the trigger returns NO-APPLY, the AVM does not apply the event. If the trigger executes after the event takes place, NO-APPLY has no effect.

Note: If a CHOOSE, DEFAULT-ACTION, or VALUE-CHANGED event executes a trigger as a result of a mouse click that changes input focus, NO-APPLY will return focus to the widget that had focus prior to the event.


Table 7: High-level widget events

EventUser actionAffected widgetsAVM actionCHOOSEA keyboard or mouse action that chooses a widget.Button,
non-toggle-box menu itemTrigger executes after choose takes placeDEFAULT-ACTIONA native keyboard or mouse event that confirms the selection of a value in a selection list or browse. In Windows applications, double-click a list item. In
character applications, press
RETURN or DELETE-LINE.Selection list, BrowseTrigger dependentDROP-FILE-NOTIFY1, 2A mouse action that completes a drag-and-drop operation on a widget.Browse, Button, Combo-box, Dialog-box, Editor, Fill-in, Frame, Radio-set,
Selection-list, Slider, Toggle, WindowTrigger executes after drag-and-drop operation concludes


Note: The trigger should call the
END-FILE-DROP()
method when it has finished processing all the files.ENDOccurs when the user repositions the browse to the end of the query's result set by pressing the END key.BrowseTrigger dependentEND-SEARCH1Occurs when an updateable browse ends a user-initiated search when a user either selects a row marker or clicks in a cell.BrowseTrigger dependent













1 Windows only.
2 Graphical interfaces only.


EventUser actionAffected widgetsAVM actionENTRYA keyboard or mouse action that gives focus to the widget.Browse, browse cell, button, combo box, control container, dialog box, editor, fill-in, frame, radio set, selection list,
slider, toggle box, windowTrigger dependent


Note: For a browse widget, ON ENTRY OF browse-name specifies a trigger for the browse widget and ON ENTRY OF column-name IN BROWSE browse-name specifies a trigger for a browse cell. The browse cell is the intersection of the named column and the currently focused
row.HOMEOccurs when the user repositions the browse to the beginning of the query's result set by pressing the HOME key.BrowseTrigger dependentITERATION-CHANGEDA keyboard or mouse action that changes the current iteration of a browse. This event is obsolete; see the VALUE-CHANGED Event
reference entry.BrowseTrigger dependentLEAVEA keyboard or mouse action that takes focus from the widget.Browse, browse cell, button, combo box, control container, dialog box, editor, fill-in, frame, radio set, selection list,
slider, toggle box, windowTrigger dependent


Note: For a browse widget, ON LEAVE OF browse-name specifies a trigger for the browse widget and ON LEAVE OF column-name IN BROWSE browse-name specifies a trigger for a browse cell. The browse cell is the intersection of the named column and the currently focused
row.MENU-DROPA keyboard or mouse action that displays a menu.Menu3, submenuTrigger dependent

3 Supported only if the Menu POPUP-ONLY attribute is set to TRUE and the menu is set as a popup for some other widget.


EventUser actionAffected widgetsAVM actionOFF-END4A keyboard or mouse action that tries to move after the last row of a browse.BrowseTrigger dependentOFF-HOMEA keyboard or mouse action that tries to move before the first row of a browse.BrowseTrigger dependentPARENT-WINDOW-CLOSEAn event that each descendant window receives when the common ancestor window in that family receives a WINDOW-CLOSE event.WindowTrigger dependentROW-DISPLAYAny browse action that results in a row being displayed in the browse.BrowseTrigger dependent


Note: The use of triggers for this event is restricted to special cases. When a row is displayed, use a trigger to modify attributes of
individual cells in the column. It should be restricted to the following uses: changing cell colors, changing the cell font, referencing the cell in an expression, and (in Windows) changing the cell format.ROW-ENTRYA keyboard or mouse action that gives an updateable cell focus in a browse row.BrowseTrigger dependentROW-LEAVEA keyboard or mouse action that takes focus from the browse row where an updateable cell has focus.BrowseTrigger dependentSCROLL-HORIZONTAL2A keyboard or mouse action that causes a horizontal scroll in a browse.BrowseTrigger dependent


Note: This event fires when a mouse or keyboard action scrolls a browse horizontally.5
4 The OFF-END event can also occur when there are more rows to retrieve in the query on a ProDataSet temp-table buffer. For more information, see the ProDataSet events on page 22.


EventUser actionAffected widgetsAVM actionSCROLL-NOTIFY2A mouse action in the
scrollbar area of a browse.BrowseTrigger dependent


Note: This event allows the developer to track physical movement of the focused row in the browse viewport.


This event is supported only for backward compatibility. Use
SCROLL-HORIZONTAL and SCROLL-VERTICAL
instead.SCROLL-VERTICAL2A keyboard or mouse action that causes a vertical scroll in a browse.BrowseTrigger dependent


Note: This event fires when a mouse or keyboard action scrolls a browse vertically.5START-SEARCH1A keyboard or mouse action that places an updateable browse into search mode.BrowseTrigger dependentVALUE-CHANGEDA keyboard or mouse action that changes the value of a widget. For the browse, any action that selects a row.Browse, combo-box, editor (Windows GUI only), fill-in, radio set, selection list,
slider, toggle box, toggle box menu itemTrigger executes after value changesWINDOW-CLOSEA keyboard or mouse action that causes the native
window manager to close the affected window or dialog box.Dialog box, windowTrigger dependent





5 Only one SCROLL-VERTICAL or SCROLL-HORIZONTAL event will be generated each time the user scrolls the browse using the scroll bar, regardless of how many rows or columns the user scrolls through. However, each click of the mouse wheel counts as an independent scrolling event, so multiple events will be generated if the user rotates the wheel through multiple clicks. When scrolling is caused by keyboard actions, a SCROLL-VERTICAL or SCROLL-HORIZONTAL event will be generated after each key press, as long as the key press actually causes the browse to scroll. Holding a key down is equivalent to multiple key presses and will generate multiple events.


EventUser actionAffected widgetsAVM actionWINDOW-MAXIMIZED1A keyboard or mouse action that causes the native
window system to resize the window to its maximum size.WindowTrigger executes after event takes place.
However since the native system has control, a NO-APPLY does not stop the event from occurring.


Note: This event occurs only in Windows.WINDOW-MINIMIZEDA keyboard or mouse action that causes the native
window system to minimize (iconify) a window and hide all of its descendant windows.WindowTrigger executes after event takes place.
However, since the native system has control, a NO-APPLY does not stop the event from occurring.WINDOW-RESIZEDA keyboard or mouse action that causes the native
window system to resize the window to any extent vertically or horizontally.WindowTrigger executes after event takes place.
However, since the native system has control, a NO-APPLY does not stop the event from occurring.WINDOW-RESTOREDA keyboard or mouse action that causes the native
window system to restore a window and any descendant windows to the state they were in before a prior maximize or minimize event.WindowTrigger executes after event takes place.
However since the native system has control, a NO-APPLY does not stop the event from occurring.
Direct manipulation events
Direct manipulation events are ABL events that directly modify the size, shape, position, and appearance of a widget. These events are generated by mouse actions. Each user interface widget either has direct manipulation enabled or does not. Some types of widgets, such as menus, cannot have direct manipulation enabled. You can enable widgets for direct manipulation by setting the SELECTABLE, MOVABLE, or RESIZABLE attribute to TRUE.
If a widget has direct manipulation enabled, then direct manipulation events take priority over all other events. In other words, while data manipulation is enabled, the widget cannot perform data entry or application control functions. For example, if you set SELECTABLE to TRUE for a button, ABL interprets a MOUSE-SELECT-UP event as a SELECTION event. If you set SELECTABLE to FALSE, ABL interprets the same event as a CHOOSE event.
Direct manipulation events can be broken down into two types: general and frame-only. General direct manipulation events apply to both field-level and frame widgets. Frame-only direct manipulation events apply only to frames.

The following sections list the ABL events associated with direct widget manipulation. The user actions listed for these events assume that you set the appropriate attributes to make each event possible. For example, a widget must be SELECTABLE to receive the SELECTION event.

General direct manipulation events
The following table lists the direct manipulation events that apply to field-level widgets and frames.
Table 8: General direct manipulation events

EventUser actionAffected widgetsAVM actionDESELECTIONFor all selected widgets in a frame, click the mouse SELECT button on an unselected widget or in empty space in the frame.
For a single selected widget, click the mouse EXTEND button on a selected widget.Frame and field-level widgets with
SELECTABLE attribute set to TRUE; browses.Internal: Sets the widget's SELECTED attribute to FALSE. This setting takes effect after any trigger for the event executes.
Screen: Removes the highlight from the affected widget or widgets.END-MOVERelease the pressed mouse MOVE button after moving the drag box for the widget or widgets.Frame and field-level widgets with MOVABLE attribute set to TRUE; Also browse-columns.Internal: Generates an END-MOVE event for each moved widget.
Screen: Moves each widget to the new x and y coordinates of its drag box.END-RESIZERelease the pressed mouse SELECT button
after stretching the resize box to resize the widget.Frame and field-level widgets with RESIZABLE and SELECTABLE
attributes set to TRUE; Also browse-columns.Internal: Generates an END-RESIZE event for the resized widget.
Screen: Resizes the widget to the new x and y coordinates of its resize box.END-ROW-RESIZERelease the pressed mouse SELECT button after resizing a row.Browses.Internal: Generates an END-ROW-RESIZE event
for the resized row.
Screen: Resizes all rows to the new height.SELECTIONFor a single unselected widget, click the mouse SELECT or EXTEND
button on the widget.
For multiple unselected widgets, release the pressed EXTEND button after drawing a select box around the widgets.Frame and field-level widgets with
SELECTABLE attribute set to TRUE.Internal: Sets each widget's SELECTED attribute to TRUE. This setting takes effect after any trigger for the event executes.
Screen: Highlights the affected widget or widgets.

EventUser actionAffected widgetsAVM actionSTART-MOVEFor a single widget, with the mouse pointer on the widget, press and hold the mouse MOVE button, and begin moving the mouse pointer.
For multiple selected widgets—With the mouse pointer on any one of the selected widgets, press and hold the mouse MOVE button, and begin moving the mouse pointer.Frame and field-level widgets with MOVABLE attribute set to TRUE; for multiple widgets,
SELECTABLE attribute also set to TRUE; Also browse-columns.Internal: Sends a
START-MOVE event to all selected widgets. If the
trigger returns a NO-APPLY, the AVM does not generate the subsequent END-MOVE event.
Screen: Draws a drag box around each of the one or more affected widgets, and moves each drag box in the direction of the moving mouse pointer.START-RESIZEWith the mouse pointer on a resize handle of a selected widget, press and hold the mouse SELECT button and begin moving the mouse pointer.Frame and field-level widgets with RESIZABLE and SELECTABLE
attributes set to TRUE; Browse columns.Internal: Sends a
START-RESIZE event to the selected widget. If the trigger returns NO-APPLY, the AVM does not generate the subsequent END-RESIZE event.
Screen: Stretches a resize box around the widget in the direction of the moving mouse pointer.START-ROW-RESIZEWith the mouse pointer on a row, press and hold the mouse SELECT button and begin moving the mouse pointer.Browses.Internal: Sends a
START-ROW-RESIZE event
to the browse. If the trigger returns NO-APPLY, the AVM does not generate the subsequent
END-ROW-RESIZE event.
Screen: Stretches a resize box around the row in the direction of the moving mouse pointer.
Frame-only direct manipulation events
The following table lists the direct manipulation events that apply only to frames.

Table 9: Frame-only direct manipulation events

EventUser actionAffected widgetsAVM actionEMPTY-SELECTIONClick the mouse SELECT
button on an empty space in the frame.Frame and dialog box, whether its SELECTABLE
attribute is set to TRUE or FALSE.Internal: Sends a DESELECTION event to all selected widgets in the frame and sends the
EMPTY-SELECTION event to the frame.
Screen: Removes the highlight around any selected widgets in the frame.END-BOX-SELECTIONRelease the pressed mouse SELECT or
EXTEND
button after moving the mouse pointer to stretch the select box.Frame and dialog box with
BOX-SELECTABLE
attribute set to TRUE.Internal: If the user pressed the mouse SELECT button, the AVM sends a
SELECTION event to all widgets surrounded by the select box. If the user pressed a mouse EXTEND
button, the AVM sends a SELECTION event to all unselected widgets, and a DESELECTION event to all selected widgets surrounded by the select box.
If a trigger on END-BOX-SELECTION returns NO-APPLY, the AVM does not send a subsequent SELECTION or
DESELECTION event. Note that this behavior differs from the behavior of END-MOVE and END-RESIZE.
Screen: Erases the select box, highlights selected widgets, and removes the highlight from deselected widgets.START-BOX-SELECTIONPress and hold the mouse
SELECT or EXTEND
button in an empty area of the frame and begin moving the mouse
pointer.Frame and dialog box with
BOX-SELECTABLE
attribute set to TRUE.Internal: Sends a
START-BOX-SELECTION event to the frame. If a trigger returns NO-APPLY, the AVM does not generate the subsequent END-BOX-SELECTION event.
Screen: Draws a select box, which initially appears as a dot.
Developer events
ABL provides eleven events, labeled U1 through U10 and CLOSE, that you can invoke on any widget or handle using the APPLY statement. The only function of a developer event is the one provided by your own trigger definition.


Socket events
ABL looks for events to execute in the context of input-blocking or event-processing statements. During this processing if the AVM detects that data is available on a socket or that the remote end closed its socket or it detects that a client has connected to a port that the server has enabled connections to, a socket event is generated.
There are only two socket events, the READ-RESPONSE event, which applies only to socket objects, and the CONNECT event which applies only to server socket objects.

READ-RESPONSE event
AVM Detects — Data is available on a socket or the remote end of a connection has closed its socket; applies only to socket objects.
AVM Action — The AVM invokes the READ-RESPONSE event method or procedure.
The SET-CALLBACK() method is used to name the READ-RESPONSE event method or procedure and to associate it with a socket object. The AVM invokes this method or procedure whenever it detects that data is available on the socket or that the remote end of the socket has closed its end of the socket. In this method or procedure, the SELF handle identifies the affected socket object.

Note: The SET-READ-RESPONSE-PROCEDURE () can also be used to name the event procedure, but this is only for procedures. The SET-CALLBACK() method can be used for both procedures and methods, and is preferable.

To determine if the event method or procedure was invoked because data is available for reading or because of a disconnect, the application can use one of several methods:
• The CONNECTED( ) method returns FALSE if the socket is not connected to a port, TRUE if it is connected.
• The GET-BYTES-AVAILABLE( ) method returns zero if the socket is not connected to a port or the number of bytes available for reading if it is connected.
• The READ( ) method returns FALSE if the socket is not connected to a port. It returns TRUE and the read data if it is connected.

CONNECT event
AVM Detects — A client has connected to a port that the server has enabled connections to; applies only to server socket objects.
AVM Action — The AVM invokes the CONNECT event procedure.
The SET-CALLBACK( ) method is used to name the CONNECT event procedure or method and to associate it with a server socket object. The CONNECT event procedure or method must accept one input parameter of type HANDLE. This is the handle to the implicitly created socket object for this connection. It is via this socket object that the server communicates with the client.

Note: The SET-CONNECT-PROCEDURE( ) method can also be used to name the event procedure, but this is only for procedures. Progress recommends the SET-CALLBACK() method that can be used for both procedures and methods.

If the SET-CALLBACK( ) method is not invoked, or if it fails, no CONNECT event procedure or method will be executed when the CONNECT event occurs.


ProDataSet events
ABL provides events you can invoke to execute application-specific code that handles FILL operations on a ProDataSet object or Buffer object, as well as row-level change operations. You can use the
SET-CALLBACK-PROCEDURE( ) method to associate an action with these events.
Event procedures must define a single parameter for the ProDataSet object (DATASET or DATASET-HANDLE) as an INPUT parameter BY-REFERENCE. This allows the event procedure to operate on the ProDataSet object using static ABL to reference its buffers and fields, without the ProDataSet object being physically copied. This also means that because the ProDataSet object is not copied, changes made to the ProDataSet object by the event procedure are made to the same copy used by all procedures.
The following sections describe the ProDataSet events.
• FILL events on page 22
• Row-level events on page 23
• OFF-END event on page 24
• FIND-FAILED event on page 25
• SYNCHRONIZE event on page 25

FILL events
There are two levels of FILL events: the first level is for a ProDataSet object or one of its member buffer objects; the second level is for individual records created in each temp-table.
The following table lists the first-level FILL events.
Table 10: First-level FILL events

EventAffected objectsAVM actionAFTER-FILLBuffer object of a DATASET
temp-table, ProDataSet objectThis event occurs at the very end of a FILL, and can be used to adjust the contents of the ProDataSet object or Buffer object, reject the FILL operation, or disconnect from a server or database. For a child table, the event occurs once for each parent record that is created.BEFORE-FILLBuffer object of a DATASET
temp-table, ProDataSet objectThis event occurs at the very beginning of a FILL, before anything is read or created.
For a Buffer object, this event allows the developer to do preparatory work for an individual table. For the parent table in a set of related tables, where the FILL event is applied to this top-level table, it could be the same kind of connection code as for the ProDataSet object as a whole. For a child table, the event occurs once for each parent record that is created, and allows the developer to adjust the query for the child table, or cancel the FILL for that parent altogether.
For a ProDataSet object, this event allows the developer to make a server or database connection, or do other preparatory work.
Alternatively, it allows the developer to intercept and fully replace the default behavior.
The following table lists the second-level FILL events. These events occur once immediately before or after each record is created in a temp-table during a FILL.
Table 11: Second-level FILL events

EventAffected objectsAVM actionAFTER-ROW-FILLBuffer object of a DATASET temp-tableThis event occurs after a record is created in the temp-table. The procedure can, for example, modify field values in the record by supplying values for calculated fields, or perform filtering and reject a record by deleting it. The procedure cannot modify record currency using the ProDataSet object buffers in any other way. It can use separately defined buffers to modify the ProDataSet object in other ways. The procedure can RETURN ERROR to abort the entire FILL, or RETURN NO-APPLY to cancel the cascading of the FILL to child buffers, if any.BEFORE-ROW-FILLBuffer object of a DATASET temp-tableThis event occurs before a record is created in the temp-table, but after the data source record(s) for it are read. For example, this procedure could examine the database buffers or other information and decide not to create the record, using a RETURN NO-APPLY statement.
Row-level events
Row-level events are defined for making local changes to the records in a ProDataSet member buffer object. The following table lists the row-level events.
Table 12: Row-level events

EventAffected objectsAVM actionROW-CREATEBuffer object of a DATASET temp-tableThis event occurs immediately after the record is created in the temp-table. The current buffer for the temp-table is available and contains initial values as defined in the temp-table definition (or inherited from the schema). You can use this event to calculate
initial values for fields, make changes to other records, or reject the creation by deleting the new temp-table record.

EventAffected objectsAVM actionROW-DELETEBuffer object of a DATASET temp-tableThis event occurs when you delete a temp-table record, immediately before the record is deleted. The event procedure can use this event to RETURN ERROR to cancel the delete, or to make adjustments to other records based on the delete. Since the record has not yet been deleted, the record is in the temp-table buffer and the code can look at its values. Because the code can assume that the DELETE will go through unless cancelled by the event procedure itself, it can take actions based on the record deletion while the record is still there to be looked at.ROW-UPDATEBuffer object of a DATASET temp-tableThis event occurs immediately before the record is updated in the temp-table. It typically occurs when:
• The buffer scope ends
• The transaction scope ends
• The RELEASE statement or BUFFER-RELEASE( ) method is run on the buffer
• The buffer is needed for another record
The AVM sets the SELF system handle to the handle of the buffer on which the event procedure is running before calling the event handler. If the event handler returns NO-APPLY or ERROR, the return is ignored. The handler has run, and it is too late to undo any changes to the record.
You can use this event to determine if and how a record has changed by reading the buffer in the before-image table (using the SELF:BEFORE-ROWID attribute) and comparing it to the updated buffer. You can also use this event in the event handler to update fields in the record (for example, to supply a calculated field).
You cannot read another record into the buffer on which the event procedure is running in the event handler. If you need to read
another record, use a different buffer to avoid disturbing the record you are currently updating.
OFF-END event
The OFF-END event occurs when you position a query on a ProDataSet temp-table buffer past the last row. You can use this event to retrieve additional data source rows to add at the bottom of a ProDataSet temp-table (for example, in batches when there are too many data source rows to retrieve at one time).
The OFF-END event can also occur when the user performs a keyboard or mouse action in a browse that scrolls off the end (past the last row) of a browse on a ProDataSet temp-table buffer. For more information about using the OFF-END event with a browse, see High-level widget events on page 12.

Note: The OFF-END event is similar to the QUERY-OFF-END attribute, which is set to TRUE whenever the associated query object is positioned past the last row. The difference is that you must test the QUERY-OFF-END attribute for this condition at a specific place in your application code, whereas the OFF-END event procedure executes like a trigger whenever the event occurs.


Consider the following restrictions when using the OFF-END event with a query on a ProDataSet temp-table buffer:
• You can attach these events only to a query on a single ProDataSet temp-table buffer. You cannot attach these events to a query on a database buffer, or a query that involves a join.
• The query must be a scrolling query.
• If you never RETURN NO-APPLY, from the OFF-END event handler, the query will infinitely loop.
• Call the SET-CALLBACK-PROCEDURE( ) method before the query is opened.
• If you use the GET LAST statement or GET-LAST( ) method to get the last record associated with the query, the event handler is called repeatedly until it does not RETURN NO-APPLY (indicating that all records have been retrieved). For this reason, use caution when offering users the GET LAST action.
• The INDEXED-REPOSITION option is ignored for the query.

FIND-FAILED event
The FIND-FAILED event occurs when a FIND on a ProDataSet temp-table buffer fails. This can be the result of the FIND statement, the FIND-FIRST() method, or the FIND-UNIQUE() method. FIND-FAILED is NOT fired for FIND NEXT, FIND PREV, or FIND LAST statements, the CAN-FIND function, or the FIND-LAST( ) method.
You can use this event to adjust the contents of the ProDataSet object. The event handler must be able to determine the action to take based on the context of the ProDataSet object, and must RETURN NO-APPLY to indicate the action was successful. For example, when the event occurs, the event handler could retrieve or create a missing row or a set of related rows into the temp-table and RETURN NO-APPLY so the AVM can redo the operation that raised the event and continue processing.

SYNCHRONIZE event
The SYNCHRONIZE event occurs when a ProDataSet temp-table buffer is synchronized. That is, when the SYNCHRONIZE( ) method is run on the buffer or a parent buffer, or the buffer is selected in a browse. The event handler is invoked recursively at every level of the ProDataSet object hierarchy just before the recursion to the child levels.
By default, if the query is associated with a browse, the synchronize action of reopening the query automatically refreshes the browse. If the query is not associated with a browse, the synchronize action automatically gets the first row in the query by invoking a GET FIRST operation. If there is a REPOSITION data relation and no browse, the synchronize action gets the next record in the query by invoking a GET NEXT operation. Once these actions attempt to populate the buffer at a particular level, the SYNCHRONIZE event runs before moving recursively to the next lower level.
This event allows you to fetch rows, display buffer values in a frame, or take some other action. The handler procedure can also RETURN NO-APPLY to cancel the cascading of the synchronization to child buffers.






















