ACCELERATOR attribute
   The key label of the keyboard accelerator for the menu item.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: MENU-ITEM widget




ACCEPT-CHANGES( ) method
   Accepts changes to the data in one temp-table or all temp-tables in a ProDataSet object.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Buffer object handle, ProDataSet object handle

   Syntax

     ACCEPT-CHANGES( )


   When you accept changes on a ProDataSet object handle, the AVM makes the rows in all after-image tables the current
   version of those rows, and empties the before-image tables. When you accept changes for a Buffer object handle, the
   AVM makes the rows in the after-image table the current version of those rows, and empties the before-image table. In
   either case, the AVM sets the BEFORE-ROWID attribute of every row in the after-image tables to the Unknown value
   (?), and the ROW-STATE of every row in the after-image tables to ROW-UNMODIFIED (0).
   Note: When executing the method, there is no guarantee as to the contents of the buffers involved after the method
   finishes executing.





ACCEPT-ROW-CHANGES( ) method
   Accepts changes to the data in one row of a ProDataSet temp-table.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Buffer object handle

   Syntax

     ACCEPT-ROW-CHANGES( )


   When you accept changes for a temp-table row, the AVM makes the row in the after-image table the current version of
   the row, and then removes the before-image table row. The AVM also sets the BEFORE-ROWID attribute of the row
   in the after-image table to the Unknown value (?), and the ROW-STATE of the row in the after-image table to
   ROW-UNMODIFIED (0).





ACTIVE attribute
   Indicates whether an individual data-relation between two ProDataSet object buffers is active or inactive. Set to TRUE
   to activate an individual data-relation. Set to FALSE to deactivate a data-relation.
   Alternatively, you can activate or deactivate all data-relations in a ProDataSet object by setting the RELATIONS-ACTIVE
   attribute on page 399 on the ProDataSet object handle. All data-relations in a ProDataSet object are active by default.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Data-relation object handle
   Deactivate an individual data-relation in a ProDataSet object when you want a FILL operation to load data into a
   ProDataSet member buffer using the individual buffer's query. Likewise, you can reactivate a data-relation in a ProDataSet
   object after completing a FILL operation to use the data-relation for traversing the data after the data is loaded.
   When the AVM encounters an inactive relation (or the last child buffer in the relation tree), during a FILL operation on
   a ProDataSet buffer object handle, the AVM does not fill the child buffers of that relation. When the AVM encounters
   an inactive relation during a FILL operation on a ProDataSet object handle, it treats the first child buffer of the inactive
   relation as a top-level table (including all rows from its data source) and fills each child buffer based on the data relation's query. If you do not want the AVM to treat the first child buffer of the inactive relation as a top-level table, set the
   FILL-MODE of that buffer to NO-FILL. The AVM does not fill any of the child buffers.
   If the AVM encounters an inactive relation while navigating a ProDataSet object, it does not prepare or open a dynamic
   query for the child table, even if there is a browse associated with the relation's query. If you want to access the child
   temp-table, you must do so through a separate query, a FOR EACH statement, or some other standard ABL construct
   in your application code.
   When you reactivate data-relations, the AVM does not automatically resynchronize the hierarchy of queries on buffers
   below the newly active relation. If you want to resynchronize the related buffers, use the SYNCHRONIZE( ) method
   on page 489 on the parent buffer.






ACTOR attribute
   Returns the value of the actor attribute for the SOAP-header-entryref object as a URL. Identifies the recipient of a header
   element.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: SOAP-header-entryref object handle
   If the SOAP-header-entryref object does not contain an actor attribute, this attribute returns the empty string.
   Note: In SOAP Version 1.2, the ROLE attribute replaces the SOAP Version 1.1 ACTOR attribute. The AVM
   automatically assigns the value of the ACTOR attribute to the ROLE attribute when accessing a SOAP Version 1.2 Web
   service.





ADD-BUFFER( ) method
   Adds one new buffer to a query object or dynamic ProDataSet object, without affecting the other buffers, if any.
   Use the SET-BUFFERS( ) method on page 450 to remove all prior buffers and set all buffers for the object at the same
   time.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: ProDataSet object handle, Query object handle

   Syntax

     ADD-BUFFER ( buffer )


   buffer
               A handle to a buffer, or a CHARACTER expression that evaluates to the name of a DEFINED buffer
               (you cannot specify the default buffer), that the AVM searches for at run time.
               Note: The maximum number of buffers for a query or ProDataSet is 200.
               Note: Searching for a buffer using a handle is more efficient than a character expression. The AVM
               resolves a character expression at run time by searching in the current routine for a static buffer with
               that name. If not found, the AVM searches the enclosing main procedure. If still not found, the AVM
               searches up through the calling programs of the current routine, and their main procedures. Since a
               handle uniquely identifies the buffer, no such search is required.
   The following is an example when the parameter is a handle to a buffer:

     my-query-handle:ADD-BUFFER(BUFFER Customer:HANDLE).


   The following is an example when the parameter is a CHARACTER expression:

     DEFINE BUFFER bCustomer FOR Customer.
     my-query-handle:ADD-BUFFER("bCustomer").






ADD-CALC-COLUMN( ) method
   Creates a browse column from the specified properties and returns the handle of the new column. This method can be
   used only after the browse's query attribute has been set.
   Return type: HANDLE
   Applies to: BROWSE widget

   Syntax

     ADD-CALC-COLUMN ( datatype-exp , format-exp , initial-value-exp , label-exp
       [ , pos [ , widget-type]] )


   datatype-exp
              Character expression specifying the data type. Valid values are "CHARACTER", "DATE",
              "DECIMAL", "INTEGER", "INT64", or "LOGICAL".
   format-exp
                 Character expression specifying the column's format.
   initial-value-exp
               Character expression specifying the initial value. This may be a null string.
   label-exp
                 Character expression specifying the column's label.
   pos
                 The optional integer value position of the browse column. If pos = 2, the column is the second column.
                 If the position is not specified or the position is invalid, the new column is added at the end of the
                 columns.
   widget-type
                 An optional character expression specifying the widget type of the column. Valid values are
                 "COMBO-BOX", "DROP-DOWN", "DROP-DOWN-LIST", "FILL-IN" and "TOGGLE-BOX". The
                 default value is "FILL-IN".
                 If datatype-exp is not "LOGICAL", specifying "TOGGLE-BOX" as the widget type generates a
                 run-time error.
                 The widget-type parameter is ignored in character mode.
   The following is an example of adding a column in the browse's fifth position using this method:

     CalcHnd5 = BrwsHndl:ADD-CALC-COLUMN("char", "AAA-99999", "ORD-37854",
        "OrdNum", 5).


   The ADD-CALC-COLUMN( ) method may be used on a static browse as well as on a dynamic browse.
   If the browse is already displayed, the REFRESH( ) method should be applied to the browse after columns are added
   using ADD-CALC-COLUMN( ). This will initially populate the viewport for the calculated column. The ROW-DISPLAY
   trigger would normally populate the column, but when ADD-CALC-COLUMN is being executed, the ABL calc-column
   handle is not yet set and, thus, cannot initially populate it.






ADD-COLUMNS-FROM( ) method
  Creates a browse column for each field found in the specified buffer or table. If a field is found that already has a
  corresponding browse column created, it is ignored. This method can be used only after the browse's query attribute has
  been set.
  Return type: LOGICAL
  Applies to: BROWSE widget

  Syntax

    ADD-COLUMNS-FROM ( buffer-handle |table-name-exp [ , except-list] )


  buffer-handle
            The handle of a buffer associated with the browse's query.
  table-name-exp
            The name of a table associated with the browse's query.
  except-list
                An expression that evaluates to a comma-separated list of field names to be excluded from the browse.
                Do not include the table name with these field names, and do not include spaces between field names.
  The following is an example of adding browse columns from the Invoice table, excluding the fields, Amount and
  Total-Paid:

    DEFINE VARIABLE ExcList AS CHARACTER INITIAL "Amount,Total-Paid".
    . . .
    AddCol = BrwsHndl:ADD-COLUMNS-FROM("invoice", ExcList).


  The ADD-COLUMNS-FROM( ) method may be used on a static browse as well as a dynamic browse. When used on
  a static browse, the browse will become a NO-ASSIGN browse (you must make the database updates).
  A dynamic browse column's validation expression is restricted. It may not contain a CAN-FIND function. To reference
  the field, the FRAME-VALUE function must be used.
  To create a combo-box or toggle-box browse column for a buffer-field, specify the widget type in the buffer-field's
  VIEW-AS attribute on page 514. A buffer-field's VIEW-AS attribute setting remains in effect for subsequent columns
  created for that buffer-field, until you change the attribute setting, and changing the attribute setting does not affect
  previously created columns. (The VIEW-AS attribute has no effect in character mode.)





ADD-EVENTS-PROCEDURE( ) method
  (Windows only; Graphical interfaces only)
  Adds an external procedure to the list that the AVM searches for event procedures to handle ActiveX control events.
  Return type: LOGICAL
  Applies to: CONTROL-FRAME widget

  Syntax

    ADD-EVENTS-PROCEDURE ( procedure-handle )

   procedure-handle
             A handle to a persistent procedure or an otherwise active procedure on the call stack.
   By default, the AVM searches the external procedure that created the current control-frame for the event procedure to
   handle an ActiveX control event. This method allows you to specify alternative procedure (.p and .w) files to search for
   the event handler.
   When the AVM receives an ActiveX event, it searches for the event handler in order of the most recent procedure added
   to the search list and ends the search with the external procedure that created the control-frame. You can override an
   existing procedure by adding a different one to the search list. The AVM always uses the event handler in the most
   recently added procedure.
   If the method succeeds in adding the procedure to the list, it returns TRUE. Otherwise, it returns FALSE.





ADD-FIELDS-FROM( ) method
   Copies the field definitions from the specified source table to a temp-table. It is intended for use when a temp-table
   represents a join. If it finds fields that are already in the temp-table, it ignores them.
   This method cannot be called after TEMP-TABLE-PREPARE( ) has been called unless CLEAR( ) is called first.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Temp-table object handle

   Syntax

     ADD-FIELDS-FROM ( { source-buffer-handle-exp | source-table-name-exp }
     [ , except-list-exp] )


   source-buffer-handle-exp
              An expression that evaluates to a buffer handle from which to copy the field definitions.
   source-table-name-exp
              An expression that evaluates to a table name from which to copy the field definitions.
   except-list-exp
               A character expression that evaluates to a comma-separated list of field names to be excluded from
               the new table definition.
   The following example fragment creates a join temp-table from the Customer and Order tables:

     DEFINE VARIABLE tth AS HANDLE NO-UNDO.

     CREATE TEMP-TABLE tth.
     tth:ADD-FIELDS-FROM("Customer").
     tth:ADD-FIELDS-FROM("Order").
     tth:TEMP-TABLE-PREPARE("cust-ord").
     . . .


   The following fragment creates a temp-table from the Customer table except for the SalesRep field:

     tth:ADD-FIELDS-FROM("Customer", "SalesRep").

   Note: There is a limit to the number of fields that can be accommodated in a temp-table object. The limit depends on
   how large the field information (initial value, validate information, help messages, etc.) is, but you should plan on a
   limit of approximately 1000 fields.
   This method does not create any indexes. Either indexes must be added specifically through one of the ADD-INDEX
   methods, or a default index is created.





ADD-FIRST( ) method
   Adds one or more items to the top of a combo box or selection list.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (column), COMBO-BOX widget, SELECTION-LIST widget

   Syntax

     ADD-FIRST ( { item-list | label , value } )


   item-list
               A character-string expression that represents one or more items, delimiter-separated.
   label
               A character-string expression that represents the label of a label-value pair.
   value
               The value the AVM assigns to the field or variable if the user selects the corresponding label.
   The delimiter is the value of the DELIMITER attribute, which defaults to comma. If the SORT attribute is TRUE, the
   AVM sorts new items by label before adding them to the widget. If the operation is successful, ADD-FIRST returns
   TRUE.
   If the widget's entries consist of single items, use item-list. If the widget's entries consist of label-value pairs, use label
   and value.
   If the widget's entries consist of single items, each call to ADD-FIRST can add multiple entries. If the widget's entries
   consist of label-value pairs, each call to ADD-FIRST can add one entry.
   For browses, this method applies only to combo-box browse columns.
   The following examples modify widgets whose entries consist of single items:

     return-code = my-widget-hdl:ADD-FIRST("Seoul").



     return-code = my-widget-hdl:ADD-FIRST("Bogota, Seoul, Los Angeles").


   The following example modifies a combo-box widget of type INTEGER whose entries consist of label-value pairs:

     return-code = my-widget-hdl:ADD-FIRST("Bogota", 15).






ADD-HEADER-ENTRY( ) method
   Creates a new entry in a SOAP-header object's list of entries and associates the new entry with an existing
   SOAP-header-entry-ref object. The method returns the handle to the new entry.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: SOAP-header object handle

   Syntax

     ADD-HEADER-ENTRY ( header-entryref )


   header-entryref
              The handle to the new SOAP-header-entryref object.
   Following is an example of adding a SOAP-header-entryref object to a SOAP-header object:

     CREATE SOAP-HEADER hSOAPHeader.
     CREATE SOAP-HEADER-ENTRYREF hshEntry.
     hSOAPHeader:ADD-HEADER-ENTRY (hshEntry).







ADD-INDEX-FIELD( ) method
   Adds the specified field to the specified index of a temp-table. It requires the named index to be added first.
   This method cannot be called after TEMP-TABLE-PREPARE( ) has been called unless CLEAR( ) is called first.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Temp-table object handle

   Syntax

     ADD-INDEX-FIELD ( index-name-exp , field-name-exp [ , mode-exp ] )


   index-name-exp
             A character expression that evaluates to the name of the index to which the field is being added.
   field-name-exp
              A character expression that evaluates to the name of the field to add to the index.
   mode-exp
               An expression that evaluates to desc if it is descending or asc if it is ascending. The default is asc.
   The following example fragment adds to a temp-table a new unique primary index field with two components, the first
   ascending, the second descending:

     tth:ADD-FIELDS-FROM("Customer", "SalesRep").
     tth:ADD-NEW-INDEX("abidx", TRUE, TRUE).
     tth:ADD-INDEX-FIELD("abidx", "abfield1").
     tth:ADD-INDEX-FIELD("abidx", "abfield2", "desc").
     ...






ADD-LAST( ) method
   Adds one or more items to the bottom of a combo box, radio set, or selection list.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (column), COMBO-BOX widget, RADIO-SET widget, SELECTION-LIST widget

   Syntax (combo-box, selection-list, or browse column)
   This is the syntax for a combo-box, selection-list, or browse column.

     ADD-LAST ( { item-list | label , value } )


   item-list
               A character-string expression that represents one or more items, delimiter-separated.
   label
               A character-string expression that represents the label of a label-value pair.
   value
               The value the AVM assigns to the field or variable if the user selects the corresponding label.
   Note: If the widget's entries consist of single items, use item-list. If the widget's entries consist of label-value pairs, use label and value.
   For combo boxes and selection lists, the delimiter is the value of the DELIMITER attribute, which is comma by default.
   Also, if the SORT attribute is TRUE, ADD-LAST sorts the new items by label before adding them to the widget.
   For browses, this method applies only to combo-box browse columns.

   Syntax (radio-set)
   This is the syntax for a radio-set.

     ADD-LAST ( label , value )


   label
               A character-string expression that represents the label of a label-value pair.
   value
               An integer expression that represents the value of a label-value pair. When the radio set appears, if
               the user selects label, the AVM assigns value to the corresponding field or variable.
   For radio sets, if the AUTO-RESIZE attribute is TRUE; the size of the radio set changes. Otherwise, the radio set is
   clipped.
   For all applicable widgets, if the operation is successful, ADD-LAST returns TRUE.
   Note: If the widget's entries consist of single items, each call to ADD-LAST can add multiple entries. If the widget's
   entries consist of label-value pairs, each call to ADD-LAST can add one entry.

   The following examples modify widgets whose entries consist of single items:

     return-code = my-combo-box-hdl:ADD-LAST("Seoul").



     return-code = my-sel-list-hdl:ADD-LAST("Bogota, Seoul, Los Angeles").


   The following example modifies a combo-box widget of type INTEGER whose entries consist of label-value pairs:

     return-code = my-widget-hdl:ADD-LAST("Bogota", 15).






ADD-LIKE-COLUMN( ) method
   Creates a browse column from the specified field and returns its handle. This method can be used only after the browse's
   query attribute has been set.
   Return type: HANDLE
   Applies to: BROWSE widget

   Syntax

     ADD-LIKE-COLUMN ( field-name-exp | buffer-field-handle
       [ , pos [ , widget-type ] ] )


   field-name-exp
              The name of a field in one of the buffers associated with the browse's query. If the query is a join, the
              name must be qualified with the buffer name or the name of the table associated with the buffer.
   buffer-field-handle
               The handle of a buffer-field from a buffer associated with the browse's query.
   pos
                 The optional integer value position of the browse column. If pos = 2, the column is the second column.
                 If the position is not specified or the position is invalid, the new column is added at the end of the
                 columns.
   widget-type
                 An optional character expression specifying the widget type of the column. Valid values are
                 "COMBO-BOX", "DROP-DOWN", "DROP-DOWN-LIST", "FILL-IN", and "TOGGLE-BOX". The
                 default value is "FILL-IN".
                 The widget-type parameter is ignored in character mode.
                 A widget type of "COMBO-BOX" or "DROP-DOWN-LIST" is valid only when the buffer-field's data
                 type is CHARACTER, DATE, DECIMAL, INTEGER, INT64 or LOGICAL. A widget type of
                 "DROP-DOWN" is valid only when the buffer-field's data type is CHARACTER. A widget type of
                 "TOGGLE-BOX" is valid only when the buffer-field's data type is LOGICAL. If the widget type is
                 not valid for the buffer-field's data type, the AVM generates a run-time error.
                 If not specified, the AVM creates the browse column based on the widget type specified in the
                 buffer-field's VIEW-AS attribute on page 514. (The VIEW-AS attribute has no effect in character
                 mode.)
   The ADD-LIKE-COLUMN( ) method can be used on a static browse as well as a dynamic browse. When used on a
   static browse, the browse will become a NO-ASSIGN browse (you must make the database updates).
   A dynamic browse column's validation expression is restricted. It may not contain a CAN-FIND function. To reference
   the field, the FRAME-VALUE function must be used.
   The following is an example of adding the Customer number field to the browse:

     ColHdl = BrwsHndl:ADD-LIKE-COLUMN("Customer.CustNum").







ADD-LIKE-FIELD( ) method
   Adds a field, like the specified source field, to the temp-table.
   This method cannot be called after TEMP-TABLE-PREPARE( ) has been called unless CLEAR( ) is called first.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Temp-table object handle

   Syntax

     ADD-LIKE-FIELD ( field-name-exp ,
       source-buffer-field-handle-exp | source-db-field-name-exp )


   field-name-exp
              A character expression that evaluates to the name of the field to be created in the temp-table.
   source-buffer-field-handle-exp
              A character expression that evaluates to a buffer-field handle from which to copy the field.
   source-db-field-name-exp
              A character expression that evaluates to a database field name from which to copy the field. The table
              name must be qualified with the database name.
   The following example fragments add a field to a temp-table, the first from a named source and the second from a
   buffer-field handle source:

     tth:ADD-LIKE-FIELD("ordno","Order.OrderNum").



     tth:ADD-LIKE-FIELD(bfh:NAME, bfh).


   Note: There is a limit to the number of fields that can be accommodated in a temp-table object. The limit depends on
   how large the field information (initial value, validate information, help messages, etc.) is, but you should plan on a
   limit of approximately 1,000 fields.





ADD-LIKE-INDEX( ) method
   Adds an index, like the specified source index, to the temp-table.
   This method cannot be called after TEMP-TABLE-PREPARE( ) has been called unless CLEAR( ) is called first.
   Return type: LOGICAL

   Applies to: Temp-table object handle

   Syntax

     ADD-LIKE-INDEX ( index-name-exp , source-index-name-exp
       { , source-buffer-handle-exp | source-db-table-name-exp } )


   index-name-exp
             A character expression that evaluates to the name of the index to which the source index is being
             copied.
   source-index-name-exp
              A character expression that evaluates to the name of the index in the source table that is being copied
              to the temp-table.
   source-buffer-handle-exp
              A character expression that evaluates to a buffer handle from which to copy the index.
   source-db-table-name-exp
                 A character expression that evaluates to a database table name from which to copy the index.
   The following example fragment adds a new index to a temp-table like the name index in the Customer table:

     tth:ADD-LIKE-INDEX("abidx","name","Customer").







ADD-NEW-FIELD( ) method
   Adds a field with the specified properties to the temp-table. Additional properties can be manipulated by creating a
   buffer-field object for this field.
   This method cannot be called after TEMP-TABLE-PREPARE( ) has been called unless CLEAR( ) is called first.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Temp-table object handle

   Syntax

     ADD-NEW-FIELD ( field-name-exp , datatype-exp[ , extent-exp[ , format-exp
       [ , initial-exp[ , label-exp[ , column-label-exp ]]]]] )


   field-name-exp
              A character expression that evaluates to the name of the field to be created in the temp-table.
   datatype-exp
              A character expression that evaluates to the data type of the specified field.
   extent-exp
                 An integer expression specifying the extent of an array. If extent-exp is 0, 1 or the Unknown value
                 (?), it is ignored.
   format-exp
                 A character expression that evaluates to the data format for the defined data type. If format-exp is ""
                 or the Unknown value (?), it is ignored and the default format of the specified data type is used.
   initial-exp
                An expression that evaluates to the initial value of the defined field. initial-exp can be any compatible
                data type, but is usually character. If initial-exp is not entered, the default for the data type is used.
   label-exp
                An optional character expression that evaluates to the label of the defined field. If you do not specify
                a value, or you pass the Unknown value (?), label-exp defaults to the value of the field-name-exp
                parameter.
   column-label-exp
             An optional character expression that evaluates to the label of the column associated with the defined
             field. If you do not specify a value, or you pass the Unknown value (?), column-label-exp defaults to
             the value of the label-exp parameter (or the field-name-exp parameter, if the label-exp parameter is
             not specified).
   The following example fragment adds a new character field called "abfield" which is initialized to "abc" to a temp-table:

     tth:ADD-NEW-FIELD("abfield","char",0,"X(3)","abc").


   Note: There is a limit to the number of fields that can be accommodated in a temp-table object. The limit depends on
   how large the field information (initial value, validate information, help messages, etc.) is, but you should plan on a
   limit of approximately 1,000 fields.






ADD-NEW-INDEX( ) method
   Adds a new empty index with the specified name to the temp-table. Index components must be added with the
   ADD-INDEX-FIELD( ) method.
   This method cannot be called after TEMP-TABLE-PREPARE( ) has been called unless CLEAR( ) is called first.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Temp-table object handle

   Syntax

     ADD-NEW-INDEX ( index-name-exp [ , unique-exp [ , primary-exp
       [ , wordix-exp ]]] )


   index-name-exp
             A character expression that evaluates to the name of the created index.
   unique-exp
                A logical expression that evaluates to TRUE if this index is unique.
   primary-exp
             A logical expression that evaluates to TRUE if this is the primary index.
   wordix-exp
                A logical expression that evaluates to TRUE if this is a word index.
 
   The following example fragment adds to a temp-table a new unique primary index field with two components, the first
   ascending, the second descending:

     tth:ADD-FIELDS-FROM("Customer", "SalesRep").
     tth:ADD-NEW-INDEX("abidx", TRUE, TRUE).
     tth:ADD-INDEX-FIELD("abidx", "abfield1").
     tth:ADD-INDEX-FIELD("abidx", "abfield2", "desc").
     ...






ADD-PARENT-ID-RELATION( ) method
   Adds a data-relation object for a pair of parent and child buffers that is based on the RECID of the parent buffer to a
   dynamic ProDataSet object. It also sets the PARENT-ID-RELATION attribute on page 362 to TRUE.
   Return type: HANDLE
   Applies to: ProDataSet object handle

   Syntax

     ADD-PARENT-ID-RELATION ( parent-buffer-handle , child-buffer-handle ,
       [parent-id-field[ , parent-fields-before [ , parent-fields-after]]] )


   parent-buffer-handle
              Specifies a handle to the parent buffer in the data-relation object.
   child-buffer-handle
               Specifies a handle to the child buffer in the data-relation object.
   parent-id-field
               Indicates the RECID in child-buffer-handle on which this parent-id-relation object is based. This is
               an optional CHARACTER expression. The default value is the name of the parent-buffer-handle
               appended with "_id".
   parent-fields-before
               Indicates an optional CHARACTER expression evaluating to a comma-separated list of fields from
               the parent record to be written to XML before any nested child-buffer-handle records.
   parent-fields-after
               An optional CHARACTER expression evaluating to a comma-separated list of fields from the parent
               record to be written to XML after all nested child-buffer-handle records.

   See also
   PARENT-ID-RELATION attribute on page 362






ADD-RELATION( ) method
   Adds a data-relation object for a pair of parent and child buffers to a dynamic ProDataSet object.
   Return type: HANDLE
   Applies to: ProDataSet object handle

Syntax

  ADD-RELATION ( parent-buffer-handle , child-buffer-handle ,
   [ pairs-list [ , reposition-mode [ , nested [ , not-active [ , recursive
   [ , foreign-key-hidden ]]]]]])


parent-buffer-handle
           A handle to the parent buffer in the data-relation object.
child-buffer-handle
            A handle to the child buffer in the data-relation object.
pairs-list
             A character expression that evaluates to a comma-delimited list of parent-field, child-field pairs
             describing the relationship between parent and child buffers in the data-relation object using the
             following syntax:

               "parent-field1,child-field1[,parent-fieldn,child-fieldn ]..."


             The first field in the pair is from the parent buffer, the second field is from the child buffer. This list
             can contain no embedded spaces. When filling the ProDataSet object, the AVM retrieves data for the
             child buffer based on an equality match between all pairs of fields unless the data-delation is deactivated
             or there is an explicit query definition for the data source of the child buffer.
             You can define a query for the data source of the child buffer, or you can supply custom logic in
             response to FILL events that take over complete responsibility for filling one level of the ProDataSet
             object. In these cases, the pairs-list is not used.
reposition-mode
           The reposition mode of the relation between the parent and child temp-tables. If TRUE, the relation
           mode is REPOSITION. If FALSE, the relation mode is SELECTION. The default value is FALSE.
             When the relation mode is SELECTION, the method fills the child temp-table of the data-relation
             object with all records related to the current parent. When the relation mode is REPOSITION, the
             relation is effectively ignored during a FILL, and the child of the relation is treated as if it were a
             top-level buffer.
             When navigating a filled ProDataSet object with a SELECTION relation, related data is filtered as it
             is browsed. This means the child query of the relation is filtered to make available only children of
             the current parent, and the query is re-opened each time the parent table is repositioned. When navigating
             a filled ProDataSet object with a REPOSITION relation, the child table query is always set to match
             all the rows in the child table, and is not re-opened when the parent changes. Only the buffer for the
             child is repositioned to the matching child for the current parent.
nested
             A LOGICAL expression where TRUE directs the AVM to nest child rows of ProDataSet buffers within
             their parent rows when writing the XML representation of data. This also causes the XML Schema
             definitions for the related temp-tables to be nested. When FALSE, all child rows are written after all
             parent rows are written. The default value is FALSE.
not-active
             An optional LOGICAL expression where FALSE causes the data-relation to be inactive. This allows
             you to have two relations between the same two ProDataSet temp-table buffers, but only have one
             active relation at a time.
recursive
             An optional LOGICAL expression where TRUE causes the data-relation to be filled recursively. This
             mode instructs the ProDataSet FILL to load self-referencing elements. That is, an element can reference
              a child element that already either directly or indirectly references the parent element in the hierarchy.
              Examples of this hierarchy are bill-of-materials parent/child tables or organization chart
              manager/employee relationship tables.
   foreign-key-hidden
              An optional LOGICAL expression where TRUE directs the AVM to omit foreign key fields in nested
              data-relations when writing the XML or JSON representation of data. For XML, this also causes the
              XML Schema definition for the ProDataSet to indicate that the foreign key fields are optional. Since
              the parent record in a nested relationship contains the foreign key, suppressing it in the nest child
              record is efficient. If this option is used, the NESTED argument must be TRUE.
              When working with large ProDataSets, omitting foreign keys in nested child records can yield smaller
              XML or JSON documents, more efficient network transfers, and performance gains with the
              READ-XML()/READ-JSON() and WRITE-XML()/WRITE-JSON() methods.
              Care must be taken when deciding to use this feature. The READ-XML()/READ-JSON() method
              automatically populates foreign keys in nested child records with the values in the outer parent record
              when the foreign key is omitted from the XML or JSON document. Unless you are sure that the receiver
              of the XML or JSON document will do the same, you should not use this option in your nested
              data-relations.
              For example, while .NET can read this document and populate an ADO .NET DataSet, it will create
              rows in the child DataTable with a null value for the foreign key fields.

   See also
   FOREIGN-KEY-HIDDEN attribute on page 216, RECURSIVE attribute on page 395






ADD-SCHEMA-LOCATION( ) method
   An XML Schema file location is specified by providing a pair of values: a namespace and a physical location. This
   method allows you to specify that value pair. The XML Schema file is used by an X-document or SAX-reader object
   to validate XML content.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: X-document object handle, SAX-reader object handle

   Syntax

     ADD-SCHEMA-LOCATION ( targetNamespace, location )


   targetNamespace
             A CHARACTER expression evaluating to the target namespace of the schema, or an empty string ("")
             or the Unknown value (?) if the location doesn't contain a namespace.
   location
              A CHARACTER expression evaluating to the location of the XML Schema file. This value can contain
              Unicode characters. See Internationalize ABL Applications for more information about Unicode.
   Provides the location of an XML Schema file for the parser by specifying the namespace and physical location of the
   XML Schema file.
   You can call this method more than once to create a list of schema locations.
   Note that namespace and XML Schema file locations specified programatically with this method take precedence over
   namespaces or schemas declared in XML documents or imported elements.

   This method and the SCHEMA-LOCATION attribute are both used for setting the XML Schema file location. This
   method is added for convenience.





ADD-SOURCE-BUFFER( ) method
   Adds a database buffer to a dynamic data-source object at run time.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Data-source object handle

   Syntax

     ADD-SOURCE-BUFFER ( buffer-handle, key-fields )


   buffer-handle
             A handle to the database buffer you are adding.
   key-fields
                A character expression that evaluates to a comma-separated list of one or more database table fields
                that constitute a unique key that the AVM can use to find a record in the table.





ADD-SUPER-PROCEDURE( ) method
   Associates a super procedure file with a procedure file or with the current ABL session. When a procedure file invokes
   an internal procedure or a user-defined function, ABL searches for it, among other places, in the super procedures (if
   any) of the procedure file and of the current ABL session. The procedure-search option determines which procedures
   are searched.
   For more information on the rules that ABL uses to search for internal procedures and user-defined functions, see Search
   rules.
   For a sample program that uses the ADD-SUPER-PROCEDURE method, see the reference entry for the RUN SUPER
   statement.
   Returns FALSE for a Web service procedure.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Procedure object handle, SESSION system handle

   Syntax

     ADD-SUPER-PROCEDURE ( super-proc-hdl[ , proc-search ] )


   super-proc-handle
              The handle of a running persistent procedure that you want to make a super procedure of the local
              procedure or of the current ABL session.
                ADD-SUPER-PROCEDURE returns FALSE if super-proc-hdl is not a valid handle, or if the AVM
                detects that the method was not successful. Otherwise, the method returns TRUE.
   proc-search
              Optional expression that determines which super procedures are searched when super-proc-hdl invokes
              RUN SUPER or the SUPER function. Valid values are SEARCH-SELF (or 1) or SEARCH-TARGET
            (or 2). The default, if there is no entry, is SEARCH-SELF. The search commences in the super procedure
            stack of super-proc-hdl.
            Consider the following:
            •   SEARCH-SELF starts searching in the procedure file that initiated the current internal procedure
                or user-defined function.
            •   SEARCH-TARGET starts searching the super procedures of the procedure file that originally
                invoked the current internal procedure or user-defined function (the procedure with the original
                RUN statement). If the procedure was RUN . . . IN procedure-handle, SEARCH-TARGET searches
                the super procedures of procedure-handle.
            •   A given super-proc-hdl can be added as either SEARCH-TARGET or SEARCH-SELF, but cannot
                be added as both. If proc-search is set for a super-proc-hdl, then any attempt to change its value
                generates a run-time warning, but the ADD-SUPER-PROCEDURE( ) method succeeds. The
                warning message "Changing proc-search-string for procedure <.p-name> from <string> to <string>"
                is presented to indicate that the application is using an instance of a given super procedure in an
                inconsistent manner. This warning message can be suppressed by using the
                SESSION:SUPPRESS-WARNINGS-LIST attribute. In addition, the warning message can be
                avoided by creating two instances of super-proc-hdl, one identified as SEARCH-TARGET and
                the other identified as SEARCH-SELF.

Associating a super procedure with a procedure
The following example associates a super procedure with the current procedure:

    THIS-PROCEDURE:ADD-SUPER-PROCEDURE(my-super-proc-hdl,SEARCH-SELF).

The following example:
•   Associates a super procedure with a procedure that the current procedure is working for.
•   Requests that the super procedure stack associated with local-proc-hdl be searched rather than the stack associated
    with my-super-proc-hdl when RUN SUPER is invoked in super-proc-hdl.

    local-proc-hdl:ADD-SUPER-PROCEDURE(my-super-proc-hdl,SEARCH-TARGET).


The procedure to which you add a super procedure is called the local procedure of the super procedure.

Associating a super procedure with the current ABL session
The following example associates a super procedure with the current ABL session:

    SESSION:ADD-SUPER-PROCEDURE(my-super-proc-hdl).


When you do this, the AVM automatically associates the super procedure with all the session's procedures—persistent
and nonpersistent—without your having to change their code in any way. This technique lets you replace occurrences
of the following:

    THIS-PROCEDURE:ADD-SUPER-PROCEDURE(super-proc-hdl).

In individual procedures with a single occurrence of the following:

     SESSION:ADD-SUPER-PROCEDURE(super-proc-hdl).

Super procedure stacking
You can associate multiple super procedures with a single local procedure or with the current ABL session. When you
do this, the AVM stores (and later on, searches) the corresponding procedure handles in last in first out (LIFO) order—the
handle of the most recently added super procedure first, the handle of the next most recently added super procedure
second, etc.
A collection of super procedure handles associated with a local procedure or with the current ABL session is called a
super procedure stack. The handle of the most recently added super procedure occupies the top of the stack.
If you add a super procedure that is already in the stack, the AVM removes the previous occurrence of the super procedure
handle from the stack and adds the new occurrence to the top of the stack—all without reporting an error.

Super procedure chaining
You can add a super procedure to a super procedure. For example, imagine the following scenario:
1. A, B, and C are procedure files running persistently.
2. B is a super procedure of A.
3. C is a super procedure of B.
B is a super procedure (of A) and has a super procedure (C).
When you add a super procedure to a super procedure, the result is a super procedure chain, each link of which consists
of two elements: a local procedure and its super procedure. When the AVM searches a super procedure chain, it does
not proceed to the next link unless the current link's super procedure element explicitly invokes its super version (by
using the RUN SUPER statement or the SUPER function).
For example, imagine the following scenario:
1.   A, B, and C, and X are procedure files running persistently.
2.   add-record is an internal procedure different versions of which reside in A, B, and C.
3.   B is a super procedure of A.
4.   C is a super procedure of B.
5.   X says RUN add-record IN A.
The following events occur:
1. The AVM searches A for add-record and runs it if found.
2. If and only if A's add-record exists and says RUN SUPER, the AVM searches B for add-record and runs it if found.
     Note: If A does not contain add-record, the following events occur: If B contains add-record, the AVM runs it. If
     B does not contain add-record, the AVM does not search for add-record in C.
3. If and only if B's add-record exists and says RUN SUPER, the AVM searches C for add-record and runs it if found.
In this way, the AVM avoids excessive and possibly circular searching.

Search rules
The AVM searches for internal procedures and user-defined functions depending on how the internal procedure or
user-defined function is invoked. The search rules illustrated in the first three cases assume that all the super procedures
were added with no proc-search value or with a proc-search value of SEARCH-SELF. The fourth case illustrates the
search process when a super procedure is added with a proc-search value of SEARCH-TARGET.

Case 1: When the AVM encounters a statement like the following:

     RUN add-record('Customer').


The AVM searches for add-record as follows:
1.   As an internal procedure in the local procedure
2.   As an internal procedure in a super procedure of the local procedure
3.   As an internal procedure in a super procedure of the ABL session
4.   As an external procedure file add-record.p or add-record.r
Case 2: When the AVM encounters a statement like the following:

     RUN add-record IN my-proc-hdl('Customer').

The AVM searches for add-record as follows:
1. As an internal procedure in my-proc-hdl
2. As an internal procedure in a super procedure of my-proc-hdl
3. As an internal procedure in a super procedure of the ABL session
Case 3: When the AVM encounters a statement like the following:

     add-record('Customer').


The AVM searches for add-record as follows:
1. As a user-defined function in the local procedure
2. As a user-defined function in a super procedure of the local procedure
3. As a user-defined function in a super procedure of the ABL session
Note: The rules of Case 3 apply whether or not the user-defined function's declaration (function prototype) includes
the IN proc-hdl option. In Case 3, proc-hdl represents the local procedure. For more information on function prototypes
of user-defined functions, see Develop ABL Applications.

Search rules for SEARCH-TARGET
Case 4: A procedure, main.p, has added three super procedures, S1, S2, and S3 (in that order). Each of these super
procedures has added its own super procedures, S1A, S1B, S2A, S2B, S3A, S3B. The procedure, add-record, exists in
three places: in S1, in S2 where it contains a RUN SUPER statement, and in S2A.
When the AVM encounters a statement like "RUN add-record('customer').", it searches for the add-record
procedure:
1. As an internal procedure in the local procedure, main.p
2. Then as an internal procedure in S3, and then in S2 where it is found

   The following code for main.p shows the differences in the initial setup of this case, which compares the use of no
   proc-search value (Instance 1) with the use of a value of SEARCH-TARGET (Instance 2):

     /* main.p */
     DEFINE VARIABLE h AS HANDLE NO-UNDO.

     RUN s1.p PERSISTENT SET h.
     THIS-PROCEDURE:ADD-SUPER-PROC(h).

     RUN s2.p PERSISTENT SET h.
     /* Instance 1
     THIS-PROCEDURE:ADD-SUPER-PROC(h). */
     /* Instance 2 */
     THIS-PROCEDURE:ADD-SUPER-PROC(h, SEARCH-TARGET).

     RUN s3.p PERSISTENT SET h.
     THIS-PROCEDURE:ADD-SUPER-PROC(h).

     RUN add-record.


   If S2 was added with no proc-search value (Instance 1, commented out) or with a proc-search value of SEARCH-SELF,
   when RUN SUPER is executed within add-record in S2, the AVM starts searching in S2A, which is next in the search
   stack of the super procedure, S2.
   If S2 was added with a proc-search value of SEARCH-TARGET (Instance 2, as executed), when RUN SUPER is
   executed within add-record in S2, the AVM starts searching in S1, which is next in the search stack of the local procedure,
   main.p.
   Note: The search commences with the super procedure following super-proc-hdl in the local procedure's search stack.






ADM-DATA attribute
   An arbitrary string value associated with a persistent procedure.
   Note: The ADM-DATA attribute is for use by the OpenEdge ADM only.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Buffer object handle, Buffer-field object handle, Call object handle, Data-relation object handle, Data-source
   object handle, Procedure object handle, ProDataSet object handle, Query object handle, SAX-attributes object handle,
   SAX-reader object handle, SOAP-header object handle, SOAP-header-entryref object handle, SOURCE-PROCEDURE
   system handle, Stream object handle, TARGET-PROCEDURE system handle, Temp-table object handle,
   THIS-PROCEDURE system handle






AFTER-BUFFER attribute
   Returns the handle to the default buffer of the after-image table that corresponds to the buffer of the before-image table
   currently associated with this buffer handle.
   Data type: HANDLE
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle






AFTER-ROWID attribute
   Returns the ROWID of the row in the after-image table that is the current version of the row in the before-image table
   currently associated with this buffer handle. This row can be a new or modified row.
   Data type: ROWID
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle
   This attribute is set to the Unknown value (?) for rows that have been deleted.

   See also
   BEFORE-ROWID attribute on page 72





AFTER-TABLE attribute
   Returns the handle of the after-image table that corresponds to the before-image table currently associated with this
   temp-table handle.
   Data type: HANDLE
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Temp-table object handle

   See also
   BEFORE-TABLE attribute on page 72






ALLOW-COLUMN-SEARCHING attribute
   (Windows only)
   Setting this attribute to TRUE allows column searching for browses.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget
   The default is FALSE for read-only static browses. The default is TRUE for dynamic browses and static updateable
   browses.
   If ALLOW-COLUMN-SEARCHING is set to TRUE, the START-SEARCH and END-SEARCH events will be triggered
   when a search is initiated and completed.





ALLOW-PREV-DESERIALIZATION attribute
   Indicates whether to allow an application to deserialize an object using the serialization from the previous OpenEdge
   major release version.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: SECURITY-POLICY system handle
   The default value is NO. This attribute is provided as a migration path for upgrading applications to the current release
   of OpenEdge. By default an object serialized in a pre-12.0 release cannot be deserialized in 12.0 and later. For backward
   compatibility, setting the ALLOW-PREV-DESERIALIZATION attribute to YES/TRUE allows an application to receive
   an object using the serialization from the previous OpenEdge major release version. Note that passing a serialized object
   from the current OpenEdge release to an older release is not supported.
   For more information, see "R-code updates" in What's New in OpenEdge 12.
   Note: This attribute affects object serialization when passing objects as parameters over the application server boundary
   and also via the Progress.IO.BinarySerializer class.






ALWAYS-ON-TOP attribute
   (Windows only)
   Indicates whether the window should remain on top of all windows, even windows belonging to other applications.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: WINDOW widget
   This attribute differs from the TOP-ONLY attribute, which indicates that the window should remain on top of all windows
   of the ABL session. Windows that have the ALWAYS-ON-TOP attribute set are always above TOP-ONLY windows
   in the z-order; they are also above dialog boxes in some cases.
   A window cannot have both the TOP-ONLY and ALWAYS-ON-TOP attributes set. Setting the ALWAYS-ON-TOP
   attribute to TRUE will set the TOP-ONLY attribute to FALSE. The default value of the ALWAYS-ON-TOP attribute
   is FALSE.
   .NET forms also have a TopMost property that also indicates whether the form should remain on top of all forms of all
   running applications. Windows allows you to set both an ABL window as an ALWAYS-ON-TOP window and a .NET
   form as a TopMost form. The window and form will each stay on top of all other windows on the desktop, because
   Windows maintains two categories of windows—top-most windows and non-topmost windows. All topmost windows
   appear in front of all non-topmost windows, and you can shuffle the Z-order of the two groups of windows relative to
   their siblings.

   See also
   TOP-ONLY attribute on page 500






AMBIGUOUS attribute
   Indicates whether more than one record matched the FIND predicate.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle
   If AMBIGUOUS is TRUE, the most recent unique find on the buffer failed because more than one record matched the
   FIND predicate. Otherwise, AMBIGUOUS is FALSE.






APPEND-CHILD( ) method
   Appends a node as the last child node of this XML document or element node. Connects a node into the document
   structure after the node has been created with the CREATE-NODE( ) or CREATE-NODE-NAMESPACE( ) method,
   cloned with the CLONE-NODE( ) method, or disconnected with the REMOVE-NODE( ) method. This has no effect
   on the node reference.
   If the node is already in the tree, it is disconnected from its present location and then connected at the specified location.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: X-document object handle, X-noderef object handle

   Syntax

     APPEND-CHILD ( x-node-handle )


   x-node-handle
             The handle that represents the node to append to this XML document or element node. x-node-handle
             must refer to a node in this document. You cannot use APPEND-CHILD( ) to move a node from one
             document to another.
   The following code fragment demonstrates creating a node in a tree with the name and value of a field:

     . . .
     hDoc:CREATE-NODE(hNoderef, bufField:NAME, "ELEMENT").
     hNoderefParent:APPEND-CHILD(hNoderef).
     hDoc:CREATE-NODE(hText, "", "TEXT").
     hText:NODE-VALUE = STRING(bufField:BUFFER-VALUE).
     hNoderef:APPEND-CHILD(hText).
     . . .







APPL-ALERT-BOXES attribute
   Directs application messages to alert boxes or the default message area.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   If the APPL-ALERT-BOXES attribute is TRUE, an application message produced by the MESSAGE statement is
   displayed in alert boxes rather than in the message area. The default value is FALSE.






APPL-CONTEXT-ID attribute
   Returns the universally unique identifier (UUID) for the application context in effect for the current session, as a Base64
   character string. The UUID is 22 characters in length (the two trailing Base64 pad characters are removed).
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: AUDIT-CONTROL system handle
   The value of this attribute is set by the SET-APPL-CONTEXT( ) method, and cleared by the CLEAR-APPL-CONTEXT( )
   method. This value is recorded in all audit event records generated for this application context until you either clear the
   current application context or set a different application context.
   If no application context is in effect, this method returns the Unknown value (?).

   See also
   CLEAR-APPL-CONTEXT( ) method on page 105, SET-APPL-CONTEXT( ) method on page 446






APPLY-CALLBACK( ) method
   Applies a callback procedure, which lets you execute a defined event without duplicating the event procedure definition.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Buffer object handle, ProDataSet object handle, Query object handle

   Syntax

     APPLY-CALLBACK ( event-name )


   event-name
             The name of a defined event.
   Use the SET-CALLBACK-PROCEDURE( ) method on page 452 to associate an internal procedure with a callback for
   an object.
   For more information on events, see the Handle-based Object Events Reference.

   See also
   GET-CALLBACK-PROC-CONTEXT( ) method on page 224, GET-CALLBACK-PROC-NAME( ) method on page
   225, SET-CALLBACK-PROCEDURE( ) method on page 452





APPSERVER-INFO attribute
   Connection parameter for the AppServer CONNECT( ) method.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: CODEBASE-LOCATOR system handle
   Valid only if LOCATOR-TYPE is "AppServer".






APPSERVER-PASSWORD attribute
   Password parameter for the AppServer CONNECT( ) method.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: CODEBASE-LOCATOR system handle
   Valid only if LOCATOR-TYPE is "AppServer".






APPSERVER-USERID attribute
   Userid parameter for the AppServer CONNECT( ) method.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: CODEBASE-LOCATOR system handle
   Valid only if LOCATOR-TYPE is "AppServer".






ASYNCHRONOUS attribute
   Makes a dynamic invoke asynchronously. That is, the INVOKE( ) method with ASYNCHRONOUS set to TRUE does
   dynamically what the RUN statement with the ASYNCHRONOUS option does statically.
   Note: If ASYNCHRONOUS is TRUE, the logic being invoked must reside on an application server.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writable
   Applies to: Call object handle

   Syntax

       ASYNCHRONOUS [ = logical-expression ]


   logical-expression
              A LOGICAL expression which, if TRUE, makes the dynamic invoke asynchronous. The default is
              FALSE.
   If ASYNCHRONOUS is TRUE, when the dynamic invoke returns successfully, it sets the ASYNC-REQUEST-HANDLE
   attribute to indicate an asynchronous-request object that provides information on this particular asynchronous request.






ASYNC-REQUEST-COUNT attribute
   The number of active asynchronous requests for the specified procedure or application server.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Procedure object handle, Server object handle
   For a procedure handle, this attribute is only meaningful if PROXY and PERSISTENT are set to TRUE. In all other
   cases, this attribute returns zero (0).
   The AVM sets this attribute to one (1) on the following handles:
   •   A proxy procedure handle created for an initial asynchronous request
   •   The server handle of the application server where the asynchronous remote procedure is instantiated using the
       PERSISTENT option of the RUN statement.
   The AVM increments this attribute:
   •   On any proxy procedure handle where an internal procedure defined in the specified remote persistent procedure
       context is executed asynchronously
   •   On any server handle where an internal or external procedure is executed asynchronously on the specified application
       server
   The AVM decrements this attribute as part of processing the PROCEDURE-COMPLETE event for one of the associated
   asynchronous requests. The attribute is decremented before any associated event procedure or method is executed in
   the context of a PROCESS EVENTS, WAIT-FOR, or other input-blocking statement.






ASYNC-REQUEST-HANDLE attribute
   A handle to an asynchronous-request object providing information on an asynchronous invoke.
   Note: Applies only if ASYNCHRONOUS is TRUE.
   Data type: HANDLE
   Access: Read Only
   Applies to: Call object handle
   The default is the Unknown value (?).






ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE( ) method
   Attaches a data-source object to a temp-table buffer in a ProDataSet object.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Buffer object handle

   Syntax

       ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE ( datasource-hdl
         [[[ , pairs-list ] , except-fields ] , include-fields ] )


   datasource-hdl
              A handle to the data-source object.
   pairs-list
                An optional character expression that evaluates to a comma-delimited list of field name pairs that
                specify a mapping between different field names in the data-source object buffer and the ProDataSet
                temp-table buffer using the following syntax:

                  "table1-field1,table2-field1 [,table1-fieldn,table2-fieldn
                  ]..."
                The order within each field name pair does not matter; each pair must contain one field name from
                the data-source object buffer and one field name from the ProDataSet object buffer. If you have a field
                in both the data-source object buffer and the ProDataSet object buffer with the same, and you do not
                want to map them to each other, you must qualify each field name with its table name.
                You can use the ATTACHED-PAIRLIST attribute on page 63 to retrieve this list of field name pairs.
   except-fields
               An optional character expression that evaluates to a comma-separated list of fields in the ProDataSet
               object buffer that will not be populated with data from the data source (that is, fields to exclude). Use
               this option when it is easier to specify fields to exclude rather than include. You can specify except-fields
               or include-fields, but not both.
   include-fields
               An optional character expression that evaluates to a comma-separated list of fields to include in the
               ProDataSet object buffer, as an alternative to specifying fields to exclude in except-fields. Use this
               option when it is easier to specify fields to include rather than exclude. You can specify include-fields
               or except-fields, but not both. If you specify include-fields, you must set except-fields to the Unknown
               value (?).

   See also
   DETACH-DATA-SOURCE( ) method on page 169






ATTACHED-PAIRLIST attribute
   Returns a comma-separated list of field name pairs for fields in a ProDataSet temp-table buffer that are mapped to
   corresponding fields in an attached data-source object. This list includes only the field name pairs you specified with
   the most recently attached data-source object (in the order you specified them).
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle
   This list is formatted as a comma-delimited list of field name pairs using the following syntax:

   Syntax

     "table1-field1,table2-field1[,table1-fieldn,table2-fieldn ]..."


   If the buffer is not part of a ProDataSet object, or the buffer does not have an attached data-source object, or you did
   not specify a field name pair list when you attached the data-source object, this attribute returns the Unknown value (?).
   Use the DATA-SOURCE-COMPLETE-MAP attribute on page 153 to retrieve a list of field name pairs for all fields in
   a ProDataSet temp-table buffer that are mapped to corresponding fields in an attached data-source object.

   See also
   ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE( ) method on page 62






ATTRIBUTE-NAMES attribute
   Returns a comma-separated list of an element's attribute names. The attribute names are contained in the XML document.
   If the element does not have any attributes, the empty string ("") is returned.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: X-noderef object handle

   If hNoderef is an element node with various attributes, and anames and bname are character program variables, the
   following example demonstrates listing all the attributes of the XML node:

     anames = hNoderef:ATTRIBUTE-NAMES.
     REPEAT jx = 1 TO NUM-ENTRIES(anames):
       bname = ENTRY(jx, anames).
       MESSAGE "attribute-name is" bname "value is"
          hNoderef:GET-ATTRIBUTE(bname).
     END.





ATTR-SPACE attribute
   This attribute is deprecated.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: FILL-IN widget, TEXT widget






AUDIT-EVENT-CONTEXT attribute
   The audit event context for a client-principal object. The AVM stores this application-defined audit context in the
   _Event-detail field in the audit record created for an audit event generated during user authentication with the
   SEAL( ) method, SECURITY-POLICY:SET-CLIENT( ) method, SET-DB-CLIENT function, or
   AUTHENTICATION-FAILED( ) method, and with the LOGOUT( ) method. If not specified, the _Event-detail
   field in the audit record is left blank.
   You can also use this value as an alternate index for querying the audit event record.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Client-principal object handle
   If not already assigned, during any OpenEdge-performed user authentication operation, OpenEdge assigns the value of
   this attribute (if any) from the domain configuration used to authenticate the asserted identity before sealing the
   client-principal object.
   Once the client-principal object is sealed, this attribute is read-only, and attempting to write to it raises a run-time error.
   Also, attempting to set this attribute to a value longer than 200 characters raises a run-time error.

   See also
   AUTHENTICATION-FAILED( ) method on page 64, LOGOUT( ) method on page 323, SEAL( ) method on page 431,
   SET-CLIENT( ) method on page 453, SET-DB-CLIENT function






AUTHENTICATION-FAILED( ) method
   Indicates that the identity asserted in the unsealed client-principal object cannot be authenticated. This authentication
   failure signifies that the application or database user identity in the registered domain is not authentic. Once invalidated,
   the client-principal object's properties cannot be changed and the object cannot be sealed. This method also sets the
   LOGIN-STATE attribute on page 321 on the client-principal object to "FAILED".
   Note: An application can use this method to invalidate an unsealed client-principal object for any reason.

   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Client-principal object handle

   Syntax

     AUTHENTICATION-FAILED ( [ reason ] )


   reason
               An optional character expression that specifies the reason for the authentication failure, for example,
               "Invalid user name or password". The AVM sets the STATE-DETAIL attribute on page
               481 to this value.
   If successful, this method returns TRUE. Otherwise, it returns FALSE with any messages returned in the ERROR-STATUS
   system handle.
   Calling this method generates a failed login audit event and creates an audit record for the event in all connected
   audit-enabled databases according to each database's current audit policy settings.
   The SET-DB-CLIENT function and SET-CLIENT( ) method on page 453 implicitly call this method if authentication
   fails on the identity asserted for an unsealed client-principal object.
   If you call this method on a sealed client-principal object, the AVM raises a run-time error.
   The following code fragment illustrates how to use the AUTHENTICATION-FAILED( ) method:

     DEFINE     VARIABLE hCP    AS HANDLE NO-UNDO.
     DEFINE     VARIABLE val-ok AS LOGICAL NO-UNDO.
     . . .
     CREATE     CLIENT-PRINCIPAL hCp.
     . . .
     val-ok     = hCP:AUTHENTICATION-FAILED("Invalid username or password").



   See also
   LOGIN-STATE attribute on page 321, LOGOUT( ) method on page 323, STATE-DETAIL attribute on page 481






AUTO-COMPLETION attribute
   (Windows only; Graphical interfaces only)
   Specifies that the combo-box widget automatically complete keyboard input based on a potential match to items in the
   drop-down list.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (column), COMBO-BOX widget
   When the AUTO-COMPLETION attribute is TRUE, the widget's edit control compares the input to the items in the
   drop-down list. After each incremental character keystroke, the edit control searches through the items in the drop-down
   list for a potential match. If a potential match is found, the full item is displayed in the edit control. The automatically
   completed portion of the item is highlighted. You can replace the highlighted portion of the item by typing over it, or
   delete the highlighted portion of the item using the DELETE key or the BACKSPACE key. The default value is FALSE.
   For browses, this attribute applies only to combo-box browse columns.






AUTO-DELETE attribute
   Specifies whether a dynamic buffer and temp-table object associated with a ProDataSet object is automatically deleted
   when the ProDataSet object is deleted. Dynamic buffer and temp-table objects associated with a ProDataSet object are
   deleted when the ProDataSet object is deleted, by default.
   Set this attribute to FALSE to prevent a dynamic buffer and temp-table from being automatically deleted when the
   associated ProDataSet object is deleted. The default value is TRUE.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Buffer object handle
   Note: If the buffer is not dynamic and is not associated with a ProDataSet, then AUTO-DELETE returns the Unknown
   value (?).






AUTO-DELETE-XML attribute
   Determines whether the X-document object handle is deleted on a new web request. The default is YES.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: WEB-CONTEXT system handle






AUTO-END-KEY attribute
   Directs the AVM to apply the ENDKEY event to the current frame when a user chooses the button.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BUTTON widget
   If the AUTO-END-KEY attribute is TRUE, the AVM applies the ENDKEY event to the frame when the button is
   chosen. The default value is FALSE.
   AUTO-ENDKEY is a synonym for the AUTO-END-KEY attribute.






AUTO-GO attribute
   Directs the AVM to apply the GO event to the current frame when a user chooses the button.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BUTTON widget
   If the AUTO-GO attribute is TRUE, the AVM applies the GO event to the frame when the button is chosen. The default
   value is FALSE.





AUTO-INDENT attribute
   Specifies the text indentation behavior in the editor widget.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: EDITOR widget
   If AUTO-INDENT is TRUE, each new line of text automatically indents to line up with the preceding line.







AUTO-RESIZE attribute
   (Graphical interfaces only)
   Tells the AVM how to resize a widget when the LABEL, FONT, or FORMAT attribute of the widget changes.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (column), BUTTON widget, COMBO-BOX widget, EDITOR widget, FILL-IN widget,
   RADIO-SET widget, SELECTION-LIST widget, SLIDER widget, TEXT widget, TOGGLE-BOX widget
   If the AUTO-RESIZE attribute is TRUE, the widget automatically resizes when the LABEL, FONT or FORMAT
   attributes of the widget change. If AUTO-RESIZE is FALSE, the widget retains its original size.
   The default value for this attribute is TRUE for widgets that are not explicitly sized when they are defined, and FALSE
   for explicitly sized widgets.
   When the AUTO-RESIZE attribute is set to TRUE, the AVM resizes button and toggle-box widgets with run-time
   changes to the LABEL attribute, and combo-box and fill-in field widgets with run-time changes to the FORMAT attribute.
   This attribute resizes the following widgets with run-time changes to the FONT attribute:
   •   Browse columns
   •   Buttons
   •   Combo boxes
   •   Editors
   •   Fill-ins
   •   Radio sets
   •   Selection lists
   •   Sliders
   •   Texts
   •   Toggle boxes
   For browse columns, if you set the browse column's AUTO-RESIZE attribute to TRUE, the AVM resizes the browse
   column when a change occurs in the browse column's font or in the font or text of the browse column's label.
   If the font of a browse column grows such that the height needs to be increased, the AVM increases the height of all
   cells in the browse column, which increases the row height of the browse (because all rows have the same height). This
   might affect the DOWN, ROW-HEIGHT-CHARS, and ROW-HEIGHT-PIXELS attributes of the browse column.
   If the font of a browse column decreases, the AVM does not decrease the height of the rows, because the decrease might
   clip text in other columns.
   Note: If the developer changes the size of the widget at run time by using the HEIGHT-CHARS, HEIGHT-PIXELS,
   WIDTH-CHARS, or WIDTH-PIXELS attribute, the AVM resets AUTO-RESIZE to FALSE.







AUTO-RETURN attribute
   Specifies the behavior that occurs when a user types the last allowable character in the widget.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (column), FILL-IN widget
   The FORMAT attribute controls the number of characters that a user can enter in the widget. By default, if the user
   attempts to enter more characters than the number allowed in the widget, the AVM beeps and ignores characters. You
   can use the AUTO-RETURN attribute to alter this behavior only if the DATA-ENTRY-RETURN attribute of the
   SESSION handle is TRUE.
   If DATA-ENTRY-RETURN and AUTO-RETURN are TRUE and a user types the last character in a field, a LEAVE
   event occurs and input focus moves to the next widget in the tab order. If the widget is the last widget in the tab order,
   a GO event occurs for the current frame. This behavior is the same as pressing RETURN or TAB in the field when the
   DATA-ENTRY-RETURN attribute is TRUE.
   For browse columns, if AUTO-RETURN is TRUE, when the user enters the last allowable character in a browse-cell,
   the AVM behaves as if the user pressed the RETURN key.







AUTO-SYNCHRONIZE attribute
   Indicates whether the AVM automatically synchronizes a hierarchy of queries on a ProDataSet temp-table buffer.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Buffer object handle
   Set to TRUE to synchronize the related buffers automatically. The default is FALSE.
   When AUTO-SYNCHRONIZE is TRUE and a new row is placed in the buffer, the synchronize action occurs. The
   event handler is called when the buffer has a CREATE, DELETE, RELEASE, FIND, FOR-EACH, QUERY GET, or
   BUFFER-COPY run on it.
   If the BUFFER-COPY is part of a FILL operation, a before-image operation (such as SAVE-ROW-CHANGES), or a
   deep-copy during parameter passing or COPY-TEMP-TABLE, then the synchronize action does not occur.
   If you perform a manual FILL operation using BUFFER-COPY, you can prevent the query hierarchy from being
   synchronized unnecessarily by setting the AUTO-SYNCHRONIZE attribute to FALSE.
   Note: If the buffer is not dynamic and is not associated with a ProDataSet, then AUTO-SYNCHRONIZE returns the
   Unknown value (?).







AUTO-VALIDATE attribute
   Specifies when the AVM runs the validation for a browse column.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget
   If TRUE, the AVM runs the validation for a browse column in the specified browser on LEAVE of the browse cell. If
   FALSE, the AVM runs the validation only when code for a browse or browse column specifically invokes the
   VALIDATE( ) method.






AUTO-ZAP attribute
   Specifies what happens to the existing contents of the widget when the user types new information into the widget.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (cell), COMBO-BOX widget, FILL-IN widget
   If AUTO-ZAP is TRUE, when the user begins typing in the field, the entire initial value is erased before the user's text
   appears. If AUTO-ZAP is FALSE, text entered by the user is inserted into existing text at the current cursor position in
   the field.
   You can set AUTO-ZAP only when the fill-in or cell has input focus (its handle is equal to the FOCUS handle). Otherwise,
   AUTO-ZAP is TRUE when the user tabs or back-tabs into the field, highlighting text in the field. (When the user selects
   all text in the field, the same effect occurs without setting the AUTO-ZAP attribute.) AUTO-ZAP is FALSE when the
   user enters the field with the mouse pointer, positioning the text cursor in the field.
   For browses, this attribute applies only to fill-in and combo-box browse columns.







AVAILABLE attribute
   Indicates whether a buffer contains a record.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle, Buffer-field object handle
   For the buffer object handle, the AVAILABLE attribute corresponds to the AVAILABLE function. If the buffer contains
   a record, AVAILABLE is TRUE. Otherwise, AVAILABLE is FALSE.
   Generally, a buffer-field object handle corresponds to a field returned in a query buffer. However, this field can be
   excluded from the query using a field list. In this case, if you try to read the BUFFER-VALUE attribute on the associated
   buffer-field object handle, the AVM returns an error indicating that the corresponding field is missing from the query
   buffer. You can use the AVAILABLE attribute to test whether the corresponding field was included or excluded from
   the query.
   Depending on its return value, the AVAILABLE attribute indicates one of the following conditions when applied to the
   buffer-field object:
   •   TRUE — The query buffer has a record with a field available that corresponds to this buffer-field object handle.
   •   FALSE — The query buffer has a record with the field missing that corresponds to this buffer-field object handle.
   •   Unknown value (?) — The query buffer associated with this buffer-field object handle has no record.







AVAILABLE-FORMATS attribute
   A comma-separated list of names that specify the formats available for the data currently stored in the clipboard.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: CLIPBOARD system handle
   If there are no formats available, the attribute returns the Unknown value (?). The supported formats include:
   •   PRO_TEXT — Specifies the standard text format on your system (CF_TEXT in Windows)
   •   PRO_MULTIPLE — Specifies that the data in the clipboard contains tab or newline characters, and thus can be read
       as multiple items
   For more information, see the reference entry for the CLIPBOARD system handle.






BACKGROUND attribute
   Specifies the handle for the background iteration of the frame or dialog box.
   Data type: HANDLE
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: DIALOG-BOX widget, FRAME widget






BASE-ADE attribute
   Sets the location of the ADE r-code directory. When set, the AVM adds the directory, followed by all the libraries
   (procedure libraries (.pl) and archive files (.apl)) in the directory, to the PROPATH.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   You can also specify the ADE r-code location using the ADE R-code Location (-baseADE) startup parameter. For
   more information about the ADE R-code Location (-baseADE) startup parameter, see Startup Command and Parameter
   Reference.
   With the BASE-ADE attribute and the ADE R-code Location (-baseADE) startup parameter, you can have multiple
   versions of ADE r-code on the same machine and easily switch between them.
   If -baseADE is not specified at startup, SESSION:BASE-ADE has the Unknown value (?) until it is set.
   When SESSION:BASE-ADE is set, the AVM adds the directory, followed by all of the libraries in the directory to
   PROPATH. If the directory or any of the libraries are already on PROPATH, the AVM does not add them.
   When SESSION:BASE-ADE is set, the AVM removes all PROPATH entries representing the current ADE r-code
   directory and libraries before adding the new PROPATH entries. The AVM adds the new PROPATH entries at the
   location where it removed the previous entries. The AVM only removes PROPATH entries that it added. For example,
   if $DLC/gui/adecomm.pl is part of the PROPATH, it remains on the PROPATH after BASE-ADE is set to a
   directory other than $DLC/gui.
   If BASE-ADE is set to an empty string, the AVM removes whatever it added to PROPATH.
   The AVM does not remove the ADE r-code directory or any of the libraries in that directory from PROPATH, even if
   the PROPATH statement does not contain them. These entries are part of the base PROPATH. If -baseADE or
   SESSION:BASE-ADE is used, the directory and libraries that the AVM adds are part of the base PROPATH and remain
   part of the PROPATH even if the PROPATH statement does not contain them.
   SESSION:BASE-ADE modifies PROPATH. If the old PROPATH contains a library that is not in the new PROPATH,
   the AVM automatically closes the library as long as there are no procedures from the library running.
   In Windows, the r-code directory name cannot contain characters outside of the non-Unicode code page. See
   Internationalize ABL Applications for more information about Unicode and code pages.






BASIC-LOGGING attribute
   Turns on QryInfo logging for an individual query.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Query object handle
   ABL does not provide QryInfo logging for individual queries at logging level 2 (Basic), by default. You must use the
   BASIC-LOGGING attribute to turn on logging for an individual query when the logging level of the QryInfo log
   entry type is set to level 2 (Basic). If the logging level of the QryInfo log entry type is level 3 (Verbose) or higher,
   then ABL ignores any BASIC-LOGGING attribute setting and logs query information for all queries.
   To set the logging level of the QryInfo log entry type, use the LOG-ENTRY-TYPES attribute on page 313 or the Log
   Entry Types (-logentrytypes) startup parameter with the logging level option.
   To turn on logging for an individual query when the logging level is set to 2 (Basic), you must set this attribute to TRUE
   before a query starts. For a dynamically opened query, this is before the QUERY-PREPARE( ) method on page 378. For
   a statically opened query, this is before the OPEN QUERY statement. If you set this attribute to TRUE after a query
   starts, ABL does not provide logging for that query.
   To turn off logging for an individual query when the logging level is set to 2 (Basic), you must set this attribute to
   FALSE. If you set this attribute to FALSE before a query completes, ABL does not write query statistics to the log.
   Whenever you turn on or turn off logging for an individual query using this attribute, ABL writes a log entry to the log
   file indicating the query ID, the query object handle, and the name of the query.
   For more information about the Log Entry Types (-logentrytypes) startup parameter, see Startup Command and
   Parameter Reference.
   For more information about query logging, see Troubleshoot ABL Applications.







BATCH-MODE attribute
   Indicates whether the current ABL session is running in batch mode or interactive mode.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   BATCH-MODE is TRUE when the current session is running in batch or background mode. A session runs in batch or
   background mode when it is:
   •   A client session started using the Batch (-b) startup parameter
   •   An application server agent session







BATCH-SIZE attribute
   The maximum number of ProDataSet temp-table rows to retrieve in each FILL operation. The default value is zero
   (which retrieves all rows that satisfy the associated query).
   Note: If you specify a batch size for a ProDataSet temp-table that is a child of a relation, the AVM restarts the
   BATCH-SIZE counter for each parent record (as opposed to once per temp-table).
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Buffer object handle
   This attribute is not marshalled between the client and the AppServer (unlike the LAST-BATCH attribute on page 292).

   See also
   FILL( ) method on page 201, LAST-BATCH attribute on page 292







BEFORE-BUFFER attribute
   Returns the handle to the default buffer of the before-image table that corresponds to the buffer of the after-image table
   currently associated with this buffer handle.
   Data type: HANDLE
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle

   See also
   AFTER-BUFFER attribute on page 56







BEFORE-ROWID attribute
   Returns the ROWID of the row in the before-image table that corresponds to the row in the after-image table currently
   associated with this buffer handle.
   Data type: ROWID
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle
   This attribute is set to the Unknown value (?) for row that have not changed.

   See also
   AFTER-ROWID attribute on page 57







BEFORE-TABLE attribute
   Returns the handle of the before-image table that corresponds to the after-image table currently associated with this
   temp-table handle.
   Data type: HANDLE
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Temp-table object handle

   See also
   AFTER-TABLE attribute on page 57







BEGIN-EVENT-GROUP( ) method
   Indicates (and records) the beginning of a group of related audit events in the current session. Audit event groups are
   used to group a series of related application and database audit events in one or more connected audit-enabled databases
   whose current audit policy has this audit event enabled.
   This method returns a Base64 character string that specifies the universally unique identifier (UUID) of the primary
   index for all audit event records generated by this method for this audit event group. This UUID is recorded in all
   subsequent audit event records until you either end this audit event group or begin a different audit event group. The
   UUID is 22 characters in length (the two trailing Base64 pad characters are removed).
   Return type: CHARACTER

Applies to: AUDIT-CONTROL system handle

Syntax

    BEGIN-EVENT-GROUP( event-context[ , event-detail
       [ , audit-custom-detail]] )


event-context
           A character expression that specifies the context for the audit event. The value of this expression cannot
           exceed 200 characters. You can also use this value as an alternate index for querying the audit event
           record.
            If you specify the Unknown value (?), the AVM generates a run-time error.
event-detail
            An optional character expression that specifies additional audit detail. The value of this expression
            cannot exceed 10,000 characters.
audit-custom-detail
           An optional character expression that specifies additional user detail. The value of this expression
           cannot exceed 10,000 characters.
The UUID is saved as the EVENT-GROUP-ID attribute value for each connected audit-enabled database.
There can be only one active event group per session at any one point in time. To set a different event group for the
session, you can:
•   Call the END-EVENT-GROUP( ) method, to end the current event group, and then call the BEGIN-EVENT-GROUP( )
    method to begin the new event group.
•   Call the BEGIN-EVENT-GROUP( ) method to begin the new event group. If there is an existing event group in
    effect, the AVM ends the existing event group before beginning the new event group.
Calling this method generates an audit event, and creates an audit record for the event in all connected audit-enabled
databases according to each database's current audit policy settings.
The following code fragment illustrates how to use the BEGIN-EVENT-GROUP( ) method:

    DEFINE VARIABLE name   AS CHARACTER NO-UNDO.
    DEFINE VARIABLE ctx-id AS CHARACTER NO-UNDO.
    DEFINE VARIABLE grp-id AS CHARACTER NO-UNDO.
    . . .
    grp-id = AUDIT-CONTROL:BEGIN-EVENT-GROUP
      ("Payroll app", "tax calculations", name).
    ctx-id = AUDIT-CONTROL:SET-APPL-CONTEXT
      ("Payroll app", "federal tax calculation", name).
    . . .
    AUDIT-CONTROL:LOG-AUDIT-EVENT(34122, "payroll.fed.tax.nh").
    . . .
    ctx-id = AUDIT-CONTROL:SET-APPL-CONTEXT
      ("Payroll app", "fica calculation", name).
    . . .
    AUDIT-CONTROL:LOG-AUDIT-EVENT(34123, "payroll.fed.tax.ma").
    . . .
    AUDIT-CONTROL:CLEAR-APPL-CONTEXT.
    AUDIT-CONTROL:END-EVENT-GROUP.



See also
END-EVENT-GROUP( ) method on page 187, EVENT-GROUP-ID attribute on page 192







BGCOLOR attribute
   (Graphical interfaces only)
   Specifies the color number for the background color of the widget.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (browse, column, and cell), COMBO-BOX widget, CONTROL-FRAME widget,
   DIALOG-BOX widget, EDITOR widget, FILL-IN widget, FRAME widget, IMAGE widget, LITERAL widget,
   RADIO-SET widget, RECTANGLE widget, SELECTION-LIST widget, SLIDER widget, TEXT widget, TOGGLE-BOX
   widget, WINDOW widget
   The color number represents an entry in the color table maintained by the COLOR-TABLE handle.
   For a rectangle, if the FILLED attribute is TRUE, BGCOLOR specifies the color of the region inside the border of the
   rectangle.
   For a browse cell, BGCOLOR specifies the color of a specific cell in the view port. You can set this color only as the
   cell appears in the view port during a ROW-DISPLAY event.
   You cannot set this attribute for a BUTTON widget.
   Setting the BGCOLOR attribute for any of the following field-level widgets within a dialog-box or frame overrides any
   INHERIT-BGCOLOR attribute or option settings: BROWSE, COMBO-BOX (all types), EDITOR, FILL-IN (NATIVE
   and Enabled), and SELECTION-LIST.

   See also
   FGCOLOR attribute on page 198, Frame phrase, INHERIT-BGCOLOR attribute on page 270






BLANK attribute
   Suppresses the display of sensitive data in a field.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: FILL-IN widget, TEXT widget
   If the BLANK attribute is TRUE, any current value or characters typed in the fill-in are not echoed to the screen. The
   default value for this attribute is FALSE.






BLOCK-ITERATION-DISPLAY attribute
   Specifies if the Frame phrase of the frame contains the NO-HIDE option or if the frame has multiple iterations (is a
   DOWN frame).
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: FRAME widget
   The BLOCK-ITERATION-DISPLAY attribute returns TRUE if the NO-HIDE option is specified in a frame phrase for
   the frame or the frame has multiple iterations.






BORDER-BOTTOM-CHARS attribute
   The thickness, in character units, of the border at the bottom of the frame or dialog box.
   Data type: DECIMAL
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: DIALOG-BOX widget, FRAME widget
   This attribute returns zero if the BOX attribute for the widget is FALSE.






BORDER-BOTTOM-PIXELS attribute
   The thickness, in pixels, of the border at the bottom of the frame or dialog box.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: DIALOG-BOX widget, FRAME widget
   This attribute returns zero if the BOX attribute for the widget is FALSE.






BORDER-LEFT-CHARS attribute
   The thickness, in character units, of the border at the left side of the frame or dialog box.
   Data type: DECIMAL
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: DIALOG-BOX widget, FRAME widget
   This attribute returns zero if the BOX attribute for the widget is FALSE.






BORDER-LEFT-PIXELS attribute
   The thickness, in pixels, of the border at the left side of the frame or dialog box.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: DIALOG-BOX widget, FRAME widget
   This attribute returns zero if the BOX attribute for the widget is FALSE.






BORDER-RIGHT-CHARS attribute
   The thickness, in character units, of the border at the right side of the frame or dialog box.
   Data type: DECIMAL
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: DIALOG-BOX widget, FRAME widget
   This attribute returns zero if the BOX attribute for the widget is FALSE.




BORDER-RIGHT-PIXELS attribute
   The thickness, in pixels, of the border at the right side of the frame or dialog box.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: DIALOG-BOX widget, FRAME widget
   This attribute returns zero if the BOX attribute for the widget is FALSE.





BORDER-TOP-CHARS attribute
   The thickness, in character units, of the border at the top of the frame or dialog box.
   Data type: DECIMAL
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: DIALOG-BOX widget, FRAME widget
   This attribute returns zero if the BOX attribute for the widget is FALSE.





BORDER-TOP-PIXELS attribute
   The thickness, in pixels, of the border at the top of the frame or dialog box.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: DIALOG-BOX widget, FRAME widget
   This attribute returns zero if the BOX attribute for the widget is FALSE.





BOX attribute
   Indicates whether the widget has a graphical border around it.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: EDITOR widget, FRAME widget
   If the BOX attribute is FALSE, the widget does not have a border. You can set this attribute only before the widget is
   realized.
   For editors, BOX has no effect on the size of the editor.





BOX-SELECTABLE attribute
   (Graphical interfaces only)
   Indicates whether box-selection direct manipulation events for the frame or dialog box are enabled or disabled.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: DIALOG-BOX widget, FRAME widget
   If the BOX-SELECTABLE attribute is TRUE, then the START-BOX-SELECTION and END-BOX-SELECTION
   direct manipulation events are enabled for the frame or dialog box. This allows the user to select one or more widgets
   in the frame or dialog box by stretching a select box around the widgets. The SELECTABLE attribute must be TRUE
   for at least one widget in the frame or dialog box for this attribute to be effective. Otherwise, the user can stretch a select
   box, but without any effect on the widgets in the frame or dialog box.






BUFFER-CHARS attribute
   (Character interfaces only)
   The number of characters a user can enter on each line of the editor.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: EDITOR widget
   When the last character is typed on a line in the editor, the text input cursor automatically wraps to the next line. This
   attribute can also set the word wrap margin for the WORD-WRAP attribute. For more information, see the WORD-WRAP
   attribute on page 523 reference entry.






BUFFER-COMPARE( ) method
   This method does a rough compare of any common fields, determined by name, data type, and extent-matching, between
   the source buffer and the target buffer. The resulting logical value is either TRUE or FALSE as a whole. A single field
   that does not compare causes the entire buffer to return FALSE. If there are fields in one buffer that do not exist in the
   other, they are ignored.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Buffer object handle

   Syntax

     BUFFER-COMPARE ( source-buffer-handle[ , mode-exp [ , except-list
       [ , pairs-list[ , no-lobs ]]]] )


   source-buffer-handle
              An expression that evaluates to a buffer handle.
   mode-exp
                 If mode-exp is given, it must evaluate to either "binary" or "case-sensitive" to provide that type of
                 comparison.BUFFER-COMPARE( ) method supports binary and case-sensitive comparisons between
                 CLOB as well as CHARACTER fields.
   except-list
                 A character expression that evaluates to a comma-separated list of field names to be excluded from
                 the compare.
   pairs-list
                 A character expression that evaluates to a comma-delimited list of field-name pairs to be compared.
                 You can specify an array element as one or both of the fields. This lets you compare a field or array
                 element in one buffer to a field or array element in the other buffer, when the two fields do not have
                 the same name. The order within each field-name pair does not matter; each pair must contain one
                 field name from the source and one field name from the target.
                 You can also compare one entire array to another by specifying its name without a subscript.

   no-lobs
               A logical expression indicating whether to ignore BLOB and CLOB fields in the compare. If TRUE,
               BLOB and CLOB fields are ignored during the compare. If FALSE, BLOB and CLOB fields are
               compared along with the other fields. The default value is FALSE (that is, BLOB and CLOB fields
               are included in the compare).
               Note: You cannot use the BUFFER-COMPARE( ) method to compare records that contain CLOB
               fields, unless one or both of the corresponding fields contain the Unknown value (?); the AVM
               generates a run-time error. However, you can convert CLOB fields to LONGCHAR values and use
               the EQ, GE, GT, LE, LT, and NE comparison operators, or the COMPARE function, to compare the
               LONGCHAR values.
               If you want to compare BLOB fields only, you can set this option to FALSE and use the except-list
               option to exclude CLOB fields from the compare.
                       CAUTION: When using this option, you get no warning if a LOB field has changed.
                       This can lead to inappropriate results. Therefore, before using this option, you must
                       understand the nature of your data and be sure that logic using this option will not result
                       in inconsistent or out-of-date data in the database.

   When comparing buffers in a ProDataSet object, the AVM checks as to whether the BUFFER-COMPARE( ) method
   satisfies the following two requirements:
   •   The compare is between a buffer on a data-source object table and the corresponding ProDataSet temp-table buffer.
       This means the operation can use any buffer for the data source database table, but only the default buffer for the
       ProDataSet temp-table.
   •   There are no except-list or pairs-list arguments for the BUFFER-COMPARE( ) method.
   If these two requirements are satisfied, the BUFFER-COMPARE( ) method identifies the fields to compare based on
   the pairs-list argument specified in the ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE( ) method on page 62 for the data-source object,
   if any, along with either the except-list or include-list arguments, if any. Because the ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE( )
   method already allows you to define a field mapping between a data-source object buffer and a ProDataSet temp-table
   buffer, as well as a list of fields to include or exclude from the operation, you do not need to specify these in the
   BUFFER-COMPARE( ) method.
   When comparing records that contain BLOB fields, the AVM performs a binary comparison on the BLOB data associated
   with the source and target records.
   Use the no-lobs option with the BUFFER-COMPARE( ) method to ignore large object data when comparing records
   that contain BLOB or CLOB fields. You can also use the except-list option to exclude BLOB and CLOB fields from
   the compare.
   The following example fragment performs a binary compare of all fields in the buffers, except for the two specified
   fields:

       BUFFER-COMPARE(bh2, "binary", "cust-sales-rep,SalesRep").






BUFFER-COPY( ) method
   This method copies any common fields, determined by name, data type, and extent-matching, from the source buffer to
   the receiving buffer. If there are fields in one buffer that do not exist in the other, they are ignored. This method is used
   to accommodate temp-tables of joins.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Buffer object handle

Syntax

    BUFFER-COPY ( source-buffer-handle
      [ , except-list[ , pairs-list[ , no-lobs ]]] )


source-buffer-handle
           An expression that evaluates to the source buffer handle.
except-list
              A character expression that evaluates to a comma-separated list of field names to be excluded from
              the copy.
pairs-list
              A character expression that evaluates to a comma-separated list of field-name pairs to be copied.
              You can also specify an array element as one or both of the fields. This lets you copy a field or array
              element from one buffer to a field or array element in the other buffer, when the two fields do not have
              the same name. The order within each field-name pair does not matter; each pair must contain one
              field name from the source and one field name from the target.
              You can also copy one entire array to another by specifying its name without a subscript.
no-lobs
              A logical expression indicating whether to ignore BLOB and CLOB fields in the copy. If TRUE,
              BLOB and CLOB fields are ignored during the copy. If FALSE, BLOB and CLOB fields are copied
              along with the other fields. The default value is FALSE (that is, BLOB and CLOB fields are included
              in the copy).
                      CAUTION: Using this option can create the potential for errors in your data and lead
                      to inappropriate results. Therefore, before using this option, you must understand the
                      nature of your data and be sure that logic using this option will not result in inconsistent
                      or out-of-date data in the database.

When copying buffers in a ProDataSet object, the AVM checks as to whether the BUFFER-COPY( ) method satisfies
the following two requirements:
•   The copy is between a buffer on a data-source object table and the corresponding ProDataSet temp-table buffer. This
    means the operation can use any buffer for the data source database table, but only the default buffer for the ProDataSet
    temp-table.
•   There are no except-list or pairs-list arguments for the BUFFER-COPY( ) method.
If these two requirements are satisfied, the BUFFER-COPY( ) method identifies the fields to copy based on the pairs-list
argument specified in the ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE( ) method on page 62 for the data-source object, if any, along
with either the except-list or include-list arguments, if any. Because the ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE( ) method already
allows you to define a field mapping between a data-source object buffer and a ProDataSet temp-table buffer, as well
as a list of fields to include or exclude from the operation, you do not need to specify these in the BUFFER-COPY( )
method.
When copying records that contain a BLOB or CLOB field, the AVM copies the object data associated with the source
record to the target record. If the BLOB or CLOB field in the source record contains the Unknown value (?), the AVM
stores the Unknown value (?) in the BLOB or CLOB field of the target record. If the target record already has object
data associated with it, the AVM deletes that object data before copying the new object data.
Use the no-lobs option with the BUFFER-COPY( ) method to ignore large object data when copying records that contain
BLOB or CLOB fields. More specifically:
•   When you copy a source record to a new target record, the AVM sets the value of the BLOB or CLOB field in the
    target record to the Unknown value (?).
•   When you copy a source record to an existing target record, the AVM does not change the value of the BLOB or
    CLOB field in the existing target record.

   You can also use the except-list option to exclude BLOB and CLOB fields from the copy.
   The following example fragment copies the Customer table to the buffer, bh, except that Customer.SalesRep is
   copied to a field called cust-sales-rep in the buffer:

       bh:BUFFER-COPY(BUFFER Customer:HANDLE, ?, "cust-sales-rep,SalesRep").






BUFFER-CREATE( ) method
   Creates a record, sets fields to their default values, and moves a copy of the record into the buffer.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Buffer object handle

   Syntax

       BUFFER-CREATE ( [ tenant-expression ] )


   tenant-expression
              This parameter is useful only for a multi-tenant database, and primarily one with a connection identity
              that has super tenant access. If the user has a super-tenant connection identity and you do not specify
              this parameter, the record you create is owned by the effective tenant. If you do specify this parameter,
              you create a record owned by the regular tenant identified by tenant-expression.
               If the user has a regular-tenant connection identity, and you specify this parameter, tenant-expression
               must match the tenancy of the connection identity. Otherwise, the statement raises ERROR.
               If tenant-expression evaluates to an integer, the value must be a valid tenant ID for a regular tenant
               or zero (0) for the default tenant. If tenant-expression evaluates to a character string, the value must
               be a valid tenant name for a regular or "Default" for the default tenant. Otherwise, the statement
               raises ERROR.
               If Buffer object handle references a buffer in a table that is not multi-tenant enabled, the method raises
               ERROR.

   Notes
   •   The BUFFER-CREATE() method corresponds to the CREATE statement.
   •   When working with a partitioned table, creating a record without initially setting the partition fields to valid values
       may cause an error. See CREATE statement for more details.
   •   When you pass tenant-expression, the AVM looks up the tenant identity in the database with a share lock. The AVM
       waits 60 seconds to get the share lock and raises ERROR if it fails to obtain the share lock in that amount of time.
       The AVM releases the share lock immediately after successfully fetching the row. This share lock is released even
       if the statement is called while in the scope of a transaction.
   •   The BUFFER-CREATE() method cannot be used together with other assignments in a single ASSIGN statement.






BUFFER-DELETE( ) method
   Deletes a record from the record buffer and from the database.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Buffer object handle

   Syntax

       BUFFER-DELETE ( )

   Notes
   •   The BUFFER-DELETE() method corresponds to the DELETE statement.
   •   If the table has delete validation—that is, if the table specifies an expression that must be true before the record is
       deleted—the record is not deleted, because the validation expression, normally applied at compile time, cannot be
       applied fully at run time.
   •   The BUFFER-DELETE() method cannot be used together with other assignments in a single ASSIGN statement.






BUFFER-EXPORT( ) method
   Converts data from the buffer object to a standard character format and writes it to the current output destination or to
   a named output stream. You can use data exported to a file in standard format as input to other ABL procedures.
   The method returns TRUE if at least one field was exported from the record, and FALSE if no fields were exported.
   Return-type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Buffer object handle

   Syntax

       BUFFER-EXPORT( [ stream-handle [ , delimiter [ , except-list
                      [ , no-lobs ] ] ] ] )


   stream-handle
                 A HANDLE expression that resolves to the handle of a named stream (defined via the DEFINE
                 STREAM statement. The handle is a STREAM-HANDLE object). The default value is the Unknown
                 value (?), which means that the method uses the current unnamed stream (opened via the OUTPUT
                 TO statement).
   delimiter
                 A CHARACTER expression that evaluates to a single character to be used as the delimiter between
                 field values. The default is a space character. A multi-byte character is allowed. If you specify more
                 than one character, ABL uses the first character as the delimiter.
   except-list
                 A CHARACTER expression that evaluates to a comma-separated list of field names to be excluded
                 from the export. The default value is the Unknown value (?), where no fields are excluded. Field
                 names in except-list that do not match a field in the table are ignored.
   no-lobs
                 A LOGICAL expression indicating whether to ignore BLOB and CLOB fields in the export. If TRUE,
                 BLOB and CLOB fields are ignored during the operation. If FALSE, BLOB and CLOB fields are
                 exported along with the other fields. The default value is FALSE (that is, BLOB and CLOB fields are
                 included in the operation).

Examples
In this example, a dynamic query reads all records from the Customer table and exports the records to the file opened
by the OUTPUT TO statement:

    VAR HANDLE hBuffer.
    VAR HANDLE hQuery.

    CREATE BUFFER hBuffer FOR TABLE "Customer".

    CREATE QUERY hQuery.
    hQuery:SET-BUFFERS(hBuffer).
    hQuery:QUERY-PREPARE("FOR EACH " + hBuffer:NAME).
    hQuery:QUERY-OPEN().
    hQuery:GET-FIRST().

    OUTPUT TO VALUE(hBuffer:NAME + ".d").

    DO WHILE NOT hQuery:QUERY-OFF-END:
      hBuffer:BUFFER-EXPORT().
      hQuery:GET-NEXT().
    END.

    OUTPUT CLOSE.

    hQuery:QUERY-CLOSE().
    DELETE OBJECT hQuery.
    DELETE OBJECT hBuffer.


This example shows how you can use a named stream:

    DEFINE STREAM s1.
    OUTPUT STREAM s1 TO "order.d".
    ...
    hBuffer:BUFFER-EXPORT(STREAM s1:HANDLE).
    ...


Notes
•   The method may be called on a buffer object whether the record is for a database table or a temp-table.
•   The method cannot be part of a multi-assignment statement. If it is, the compiler raises an error.
•   Like the EXPORT and IMPORT statements, RECID fields are not automatically included for database tables for
    BUFFER-EXPORT() and BUFFER-IMPORT(). However, you can explicitly reference them in the
    BUFFER-EXPORT-FIELDS() and BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS() methods.
•   For temp-table fields, fields of type ROWID or Progress.Lang.Object are not allowed. You must exclude
    any fields of those types via the except-list parameter for the method to work.
•   The method raises an error if:
    •   a stream-handle is provided and it’s not a valid handle to a named stream or is not open for writing.
    •   the except-list has an element of an array field (for example, field-name[1]). You can only exclude the field
        as a whole and not given elements in the array field.
    •   the user does not have read access to the database table.
    •   a temp-table contains a ROWID or Progress.Lang.Object field and the fields are not excluded.
    •   an error occurs when reading a record field.
•   The method must follow an OUTPUT TO statement, which redirects the output destination. You cannot write data
    to the screen.
   •   Other procedures can use the data exported with the BUFFER-EXPORT() method as input by reading the file with
       the INSERT, PROMPT-FOR, SET, UPDATE or IMPORT statements, and BUFFER-IMPORT() method.
   •   The exported data is in a standard format to be read back into ABL. The order of the fields exported is the order of
       the fields in the table definition. All character fields are enclosed in quotes ("") and quotes contained in the data
       you are exporting are replaced by two quotes (""). A single space separates one field from the next. An Unknown
       value (?) is displayed as an unquoted question mark (?).
   •   There are no trailing blanks, leading zeros, or formatting characters (for example, dollar signs) in the data.
   •   ABL exports logical fields as the value YES or NO.
   •   When exporting records that contain a BLOB or CLOB field, the AVM creates a separate object data file with the
       code page embedded in the filename and with a file extension of .blb. The filename is stored in the BLOB or
       CLOB field of the exported record. (When importing records that contain a BLOB or CLOB field, the AVM uses
       this filename to locate the object data file associated with each record.) If the BLOB or CLOB field contains the
       Unknown value (?), the AVM stores the Unknown value (?) in the BLOB or CLOB field of the exported record and
       does not create an object data file. If the BLOB or CLOB field contains a zero-length object, the AVM creates a
       zero-length object data file. The AVM raises the ERROR condition if an object data file cannot be created.
   •   The BUFFER-EXPORT() method creates large object data files in the directory specified as the output destination
       in the OUTPUT TO statement, by default. You can use the LOB-DIR option on the OUTPUT TO statement to specify
       the directory in which BUFFER-EXPORT() creates the BLOB and CLOB data files.
   •   Use the no-lobs parameter to ignore large object data when exporting records that contain BLOB or CLOB fields.
       When you specify YES for the no-lobs parameter, the AVM stores the Unknown value (?) in the BLOB or CLOB
       field of the exported records and does not create the associated object data files.
   •   For DATETIME and DATETIME-TZ data, the data format is fixed and conforms to the ISO 8601 standard for
       date/time representations (YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS.SSS+HH:MM). For DATETIME, there is no time zone offset.
   •   If you specify the delimiter parameter with a delimiter other than a space character, you must specify the same
       delimiter character in a subsequent IMPORT statement, BUFFER-IMPORT() method, or
       BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS() method that loads the data.
   •   The method is sensitive to the Date Format (-d), Century (-yy), and European Numeric Format (-E) parameters.
       When loading data with the IMPORT statement, BUFFER-IMPORT() method, or BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS()
       method, use the same settings that you used with the export statement/methods.
   •   For more information, see Export and import data dynamically using buffers in Develop ABL Applications.

   See also
   BUFFER-IMPORT( ) method on page 87, BUFFER-EXPORT-FIELDS( ) method on page 83,
   BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS( ) method on page 89, EXPORT statement, IMPORT statement, OUTPUT TO statement






BUFFER-EXPORT-FIELDS( ) method
   Converts data from the buffer object to a standard character format and writes it to the current output destination or to
   a named output stream. Only fields specified in the field list are included and they are written in the order specified.
   You can use data exported to a file in standard format as input to other ABL procedures.
   The method returns TRUE if at least one field was exported from the record, and FALSE if no fields were exported
   Return-type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Buffer object handle

   Syntax

       BUFFER-EXPORT-FIELDS( stream-handle , delimiter , field-list )


   stream-handle
             A HANDLE expression that resolves to the handle of a named stream (defined via the DEFINE
             STREAM statement. The handle is a STREAM-HANDLE object). If the Unknown value (?) is specified,
             the method uses the current unnamed stream (opened via the OUTPUT TO statement).
delimiter
             A CHARACTER expression that evaluates to a single character to be used as the delimiter between
             field values. The default is a space character. A multi-byte character is allowed. If you specify more
             than one character, ABL uses the first character as the delimiter.
field-list
             A CHARACTER expression that evaluates to a comma-separated list of field names to be exported.
             field-list cannot resolve to the Unknown value (?) as an actual field list is required. The method raises
             an error if the table does not contain one of the provided field names.
             One or more array elements may be specified in the list (for example myfield[1]). If you specify
             an array field name without a subscript, the whole array field is processed. An error is raised if you
             provide a subscript for a non-array field.

Example
This example shows how to use BUFFER-EXPORT-FIELDS() to export four fields from the Customer table.

    VAR HANDLE hBuffer.
    VAR HANDLE hQuery.

    CREATE BUFFER hBuffer FOR TABLE "Customer".

    CREATE QUERY hQuery.
    hQuery:SET-BUFFERS(hBuffer).
    hQuery:QUERY-PREPARE("FOR EACH " + hBuffer:NAME).
    hQuery:QUERY-OPEN().
    hQuery:GET-FIRST().

    OUTPUT TO VALUE(hBuffer:NAME + ".d").

    DO WHILE NOT hQuery:QUERY-OFF-END:
      hBuffer:BUFFER-EXPORT-FIELDS(?, ?, "Name,Country,State,City").
      hQuery:GET-NEXT().
    END.

    OUTPUT CLOSE.

    hQuery:QUERY-CLOSE().
    DELETE OBJECT hQuery.
    DELETE OBJECT hBuffer.


Notes
•   The method may be called on a buffer object, whether the record is for a database table or a temp-table.
•   The method cannot be part of a multi-assignment statement. If it is, the compiler raises an error.
•   For temp-table fields, fields of type ROWID or Progress.Lang.Object are not allowed. You must not include
    any fields of those types in the field-list parameter for the method to work.
•   The method raises an error if:
    •   a stream-handle is provided and it’s not a valid handle to a named stream or is not open for writing.
    •   the user does not have read access to the database table.
    •   a ROWID or Progress.Lang.Object field is included in the list.
    •   an error occurs when reading a record field.
   •   BUFFER-EXPORT-FIELDS() must follow an OUTPUT TO statement, which redirects the output destination.
       You cannot write data to the screen.
   •   Other procedures can use the data exported with the BUFFER-EXPORT-FIELDS() method as input by reading
       the file with the INSERT, PROMPT-FOR, SET, UPDATE or IMPORT statements, or BUFFER-IMPORT() or
       BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS() methods.
   •   The data is in a standard format to be read back into ABL. All character fields are enclosed in quotes ("") and quotes
       contained in the data you are exporting are replaced by two quotes (""). A single space separates one field from the
       next. An Unknown value (?) is displayed as an unquoted question mark (?).
   •   There are no trailing blanks, leading zeros, or formatting characters (for example, dollar signs) in the data.
   •   ABL exports logical fields as the value YES or NO.
   •   When exporting a BLOB or CLOB field, the AVM creates a separate object data file with the code page embedded
       in the filename and with a file extension of .blb. The filename is stored in the BLOB or CLOB field of the exported
       record. (When importing records that contain a BLOB or CLOB field, the AVM uses this filename to locate the
       object data file associated with each record.) If the BLOB or CLOB field contains the Unknown value (?), the AVM
       stores the Unknown value (?) in the BLOB or CLOB field of the exported record and does not create an object data
       file. If the BLOB or CLOB field contains a zero-length object, the AVM creates a zero-length object data file. The
       AVM raises the ERROR condition if an object data file cannot be created.
   •   The BUFFER-EXPORT-FIELDS() method creates large object data files in the directory specified as the output
       destination in the OUTPUT TO statement, by default. You can use the LOB-DIR option on the OUTPUT TO statement
       to specify the directory in which the BUFFER-EXPORT-FIELDS() method creates the BLOB and CLOB data
       files.
   •   For DATETIME and DATETIME-TZ data, the data format is fixed and conforms to the ISO 8601 standard for
       date/time representations (YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS.SSS+HH:MM). For DATETIME, there is no time zone offset.
   •   If you specify the delimiter parameter with a delimiter other than a space character, you must specify the same
       delimiter character in a subsequent IMPORT statement, BUFFER-IMPORT() method, or
       BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS() method that loads the data.
   •   The method is sensitive to the Date Format (-d), Century (-yy), and European Numeric Format (-E) parameters.
       When loading data with the IMPORT statement, BUFFER-IMPORT() method, or BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS()
       method, use the same settings that you used with the export statement/methods.
   •   For more information, see Export and import data dynamically using buffers in Develop ABL Applications.

   See also
   BUFFER-EXPORT( ) method on page 81, BUFFER-IMPORT( ) method on page 87, BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS( )
   method on page 89, EXPORT statement, IMPORT statement, OUTPUT TO statement






BUFFER-FIELD attribute
   The handle of the browse column's buffer-field.
   Data type: HANDLE
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (column)
   If the browse column does not have a corresponding buffer field, the Unknown value (?) will be returned.
   Note: This is an attribute on the BROWSE widget. For the buffer object method of the same name see BUFFER-FIELD(
   ) method on page 85.






BUFFER-FIELD( ) method
   Returns a handle to a particular field in the buffer.
   Return type: HANDLE
   Applies to: Buffer object handle

   Syntax

     BUFFER-FIELD ( field-number | field-name )


   field-number
             An integer expression representing the sequence number of the field in the buffer.
   field-name
                A CHARACTER string expression representing the name of the field in the buffer.
   Note: This is a method on the buffer object handle. For the browse column attribute of the same name see
   BUFFER-FIELD attribute on page 85.






BUFFER-GROUP-ID attribute
   The group ID (as an integer) of the tenant group to which the current record in the buffer specified by the buffer handle
   belongs. If the buffer does not contain a record from a tenant group, the function returns the Unknown value (?).
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle
   Note: This attribute can be used in a WHERE or TENANT-WHERE option as long as the specified buffer is not the
   same as the buffer of the query or FOR EACH statement.

   See also
   BUFFER-GROUP-ID function, BUFFER-GROUP-NAME attribute on page 86






BUFFER-GROUP-NAME attribute
   The name (as a character string) of the tenant group to which the current record in the buffer specified by the buffer
   handle belongs. If the buffer does not contain a record from a tenant group, the function returns the Unknown value (?).
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle
   Note: This attribute can be used in a WHERE or TENANT-WHERE option as long as the specified buffer is not the
   same as the buffer of the query or FOR EACH statement.

   See also
   BUFFER-GROUP-ID attribute on page 86, BUFFER-GROUP-NAME function





BUFFER-HANDLE attribute
   The handle of the buffer object to which the buffer-field belongs.
   Data type: HANDLE
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer-field object handle






BUFFER-IMPORT( ) method
   Reads a line from an input stream that might have been created by the EXPORT statement or the BUFFER-EXPORT()
   method. Returns TRUE if the import is successful.
   Return-type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Buffer object handle

   Syntax

     BUFFER-IMPORT( [ stream-handle [ , delimiter [ , except-list
                    [ , no-lobs ] ] ] ] )


   stream-handle
                 A HANDLE expression that resolves to the handle of a named stream (defined via the DEFINE
                 STREAM statement. The handle is a STREAM-HANDLE object). The default value is the Unknown
                 value (?), which means that the method uses the current unnamed stream (opened via the INPUT
                 FROM statement).
   delimiter
                 A CHARACTER expression that evaluates to a single character to be used as the delimiter between
                 field values. The default is a space character. A multi-byte character is allowed. If you specify more
                 than one character, ABL uses the first character as the delimiter.
   except-list
                 A CHARACTER expression that evaluates to a comma-separated list of field names to be excluded
                 from the import. The default value is the Unknown value (?), where no fields are excluded. Field
                 names in except-list that do not match a field in the table are ignored.
   no-lobs
                 A LOGICAL expression indicating whether to ignore BLOB and CLOB fields in the import. If TRUE,
                 BLOB and CLOB fields are ignored during the operation. If FALSE, BLOB and CLOB fields are
                 imported along with the other fields. The default value is FALSE (that is, BLOB and CLOB fields are
                 included in the operation).

   Example
   This example shows how you can read data back to the Customer table dynamically:

     VAR HANDLE hBuffer.

     CREATE BUFFER hBuffer FOR TABLE "Customer".

     INPUT FROM VALUE(hBuffer:NAME + ".d").

     DO TRANSACTION:
       REPEAT ON ENDKEY UNDO, LEAVE:
          hBuffer:BUFFER-CREATE().
          hBuffer:BUFFER-IMPORT().
          hBuffer:BUFFER-RELEASE().
       END.
     END.

     INPUT CLOSE.

    DELETE OBJECT hBuffer.

Notes
•   The method may be called on a buffer object, whether the record is for a database table or a temp-table.
•   The method cannot be part of a multi-assignment statement. If it is, the compiler raises an error.
•   When working with a database table, a transaction must be active at the time of the method call.
•   Like the EXPORT and IMPORT statements, RECID fields are not automatically included for database tables for
    BUFFER-EXPORT() and BUFFER-IMPORT(). However, you can explicitly reference them in
    BUFFER-EXPORT-FIELDS() and BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS().
•   For temp-table fields, fields of type ROWID or Progress.Lang.Object are not allowed. You must exclude
    any fields of those types via the except-list parameter for the method to work.
•   The method raises an error if:
    •   a stream-handle is provided and it’s not a valid handle to a named stream or is not open for reading.
    •   the except-list has an element of an array field (for example, field-name[1]). You can only exclude the field
        as a whole and not given elements in the array field.
    •   the user does not have write access to the database table.
    •   a transaction is not active, if importing data into a database table.
    •   a temp-table contains a ROWID or Progress.Lang.Object field and the fields are not excluded.
    •   an error occurs when updating a record field.
•   The BUFFER-IMPORT() method must follow a statement that redirects the input source (INPUT FROM statement).
    You cannot read data from the screen.
•   The data in the input stream must be in a standard format to be read back into ABL. The order of the fields imported
    is the order of the fields in the table definition. You must enclose all character fields in quotes ("") if they contain
    any delimiter characters. If you want to import any quotes contained in the data, replace them with two quotes ("").
    You must display the Unknown value (?) as an unquoted question mark.
•   If an input data line contains an unquoted hyphen in place of a data value, then the corresponding field is skipped,
    as it is in UPDATE. If you specify a hyphen (-) as the delimiter character, all hyphens are treated as delimiters.
•   A period (.) on a line by itself is treated as an end-of-file indicator. The ENDKEY is applied, but the file or stream
    remains open for input.
•   When importing records that contain a BLOB or CLOB field, the AVM uses the value stored in the BLOB or CLOB
    field of the exported record to determine whether or not the exported record has an associated object data file to
    import. If the BLOB or CLOB field in the exported record contains the Unknown value (?), the AVM stores the
    Unknown value (?) in the BLOB or CLOB field of the new or updated record. If the BLOB or CLOB field in the
    exported record contains a filename, the AVM imports the associated object data. If an updated record already has
    object data associated with it, the AVM deletes that object data before importing the new object data. The AVM
    raises the ERROR condition if an object data file cannot be found or read.
•   For BUFFER-IMPORT(), set the no-lobs parameter to YES to ignore large object data when importing records that
    contain BLOB or CLOB fields. More specifically:
    •   When you import an exported record into a new record, and the BLOB or CLOB field of the exported record
        contains either the Unknown value (?) or a filename, the AVM sets the value of the BLOB or CLOB field in the
        newly imported record to the Unknown value (?); the AVM does not create any object data.
    •   When you import an exported record as an update to an existing record, and the BLOB or CLOB field of the
        exported record contains either the Unknown value (?) or a filename, the AVM does not change the value of the
        BLOB or CLOB field in the existing record and neither creates nor overwrites object data.
•   The BUFFER-IMPORT() method reads large object data files from the directory specified as the input data source
    in the INPUT FROM statement, by default. You can use the LOB-DIR option on the INPUT FROM statement to
    specify the directory from which the BUFFER-IMPORT() method reads BLOB and CLOB data files.
   •   The method is sensitive to the Date Format (-d), Century (-yy), and European Numeric Format (-E) parameters.
       When loading data with the IMPORT statement, BUFFER-IMPORT() method, or BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS()
       method, use the same settings that you used with the export statement/methods.
   •   For DATETIME and DATETIME-TZ data, the data format must be fixed and must conform to the ISO 8601 standard
       for date/time representations (YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS.SSS+HH:MM). For DATETIME, there is no time zone
       offset.
   •   ABL interprets the null character as a data field terminator. This can cause unexpected behavior if a complete record
       was not read before the null character was encountered, because BUFFER-IMPORT() reads the next line to populate
       any buffer fields that were not read. Progress strongly discourages the importing of data containing null characters.
   •   BUFFER-IMPORT() requires a newline character after the last line in the file for the line to be imported. Otherwise,
       the line is not imported. Note that data exported via the BUFFER-EXPORT() method does have a new line character
       at the end of each exported record.
   •   When importing a CLOB field, the AVM uses the code page embedded in the filename of the clobfile.blb to
       determine the clob's code page.
   •   When values are imported, any ASSIGN triggers for the field changed execute after all fields are imported into the
       given record.
   •   For more information, see Export and import data dynamically using buffers in Develop ABL Applications.

   See also
   BUFFER-EXPORT( ) method on page 81, BUFFER-EXPORT-FIELDS( ) method on page 83,
   BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS( ) method on page 89, EXPORT statement, IMPORT statement, INPUT FROM statement







BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS( ) method
   Reads a line from an input file that might have been created by the EXPORT statement or the
   BUFFER-EXPORT-FIELDS() method. Returns TRUE if the import is successful.
   Return-type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Buffer object handle

   Syntax

       BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS( stream-handle , delimiter , field-list )


   stream-handle
                A HANDLE expression that resolves to the handle of a named stream (defined via the DEFINE
                STREAM statement. The handle is a STREAM-HANDLE object). If the Unknown value (?) is specified,
                the method uses the current unnamed stream (opened via the OUTPUT TO statement).
   delimiter
                A CHARACTER expression that evaluates to a single character to be used as the delimiter between
                field values. The default is a space character. A multi-byte character is allowed. If you specify more
                than one character, ABL uses the first character as the delimiter.
   field-list
                A CHARACTER expression that evaluates to a comma-separated list of field names to be imported.
                field-list cannot resolve to the Unknown value (?) as an actual field list is required. The method raises
                an error if the table does not contain one of the provided field names.
                One or more array elements may be specified in the list (for example myfield[1]). If you specify
                an array field name without a subscript, the whole array field is processed. An error is raised if you
                provide a subscript for a non-array field.

Example
This example shows how to use BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS() to import four fields into the Customer table:

    VAR HANDLE hBuffer.

    CREATE BUFFER hBuffer FOR TABLE "Customer".

    INPUT FROM VALUE(hBuffer:NAME + ".d").

    DO TRANSACTION:
      REPEAT ON ENDKEY UNDO, LEAVE:
         hBuffer:BUFFER-CREATE().
         hBuffer:BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS(?, ?, "Name,Country,State,City").
         hBuffer:BUFFER-RELEASE().
      END.
    END.

    INPUT CLOSE.

    DELETE OBJECT hBuffer.


Notes
•   The method may be called on a buffer object, whether the record is for a database table or a temp-table.
•   The method cannot be part of a multi-assignment statement. If it is, the compiler raises an error.
•   When working with a database table, a transaction must be active at the time of the method call.
•   For temp-table fields, fields of type ROWID or Progress.Lang.Object are not allowed. You must not include
    any fields of those types in the field-list parameter for the method to work.
•   The method raises an error if:
    •   a stream-handle is provided and it’s not a valid handle to a named stream or is not open for reading.
    •   the user does not have write access to the database table.
    •   a transaction is not active, if importing data into a database table.
    •   a ROWID or Progress.Lang.Object field is included in the list.
    •   an error occurs when updating a record field.
•   The BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS() method must follow a statement that redirects the input source (INPUT FROM
    statement). You cannot read data from the screen.
•   The data in the input stream must be in a standard format to be read back into ABL. You must enclose all character
    fields in quotes ("") if they contain any delimiter characters. If you want to import any quotes contained in the data,
    replace them with two quotes (""). You must display the Unknown value (?) as an unquoted question mark.
•   If an input data line contains an unquoted hyphen in place of a data value, then the corresponding field is skipped,
    as it is in UPDATE. If you specify a hyphen (-) as the delimiter character, all hyphens are treated as delimiters.
•   A period (.) on a line by itself is treated as an end-of-file indicator. The ENDKEY is applied, but the file or stream
    remains open for input.
•   When importing records that contain a BLOB or CLOB field, the AVM uses the value stored in the BLOB or CLOB
    field of the exported record to determine whether or not the exported record has an associated object data file to
    import. If the BLOB or CLOB field in the exported record contains the Unknown value (?), the AVM stores the
    Unknown value (?) in the BLOB or CLOB field of the new or updated record. If the BLOB or CLOB field in the
    exported record contains a filename, the AVM imports the associated object data. If an updated record already has
    object data associated with it, the AVM deletes that object data before importing the new object data. The AVM
    raises the ERROR condition if an object data file cannot be found or read.
•   The BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS() method reads large object data files from the directory specified as the input
    data source in the INPUT FROM statement, by default. You can use the LOB-DIR option on the INPUT FROM
    statement to specify the directory from which the import reads BLOB and CLOB data files.
   •   The method is sensitive to the Date Format (-d), Century (-yy), and European Numeric Format (-E) parameters.
       When loading data with the IMPORT statement, BUFFER-IMPORT() method, or BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS()
       method, use the same settings that you used with the export statement/methods.
   •   For DATETIME and DATETIME-TZ data, the data format must be fixed and must conform to the ISO 8601 standard
       for date/time representations (YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS.SSS+HH:MM). For DATETIME, there is no time zone
       offset.
   •   ABL interprets the null character as a data field terminator. This can cause unexpected behavior if a complete record
       was not read before the null character was encountered, because BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS() reads the next line
       to populate any buffer fields that were not read. Progress strongly discourages the importing of data containing null
       characters.
   •   BUFFER-IMPORT-FIELDS() requires a newline character after the last line in the file for the line to be imported.
       Otherwise, the line is not imported. Note that data exported via the BUFFER-EXPORT-FIELDS() method does
       have a new line character at the end of each exported record.
   •   When importing a CLOB field, the AVM uses the code page embedded in the filename of the clobfile.blb to
       determine the clob's code page.
   •   When values are imported, any ASSIGN triggers for the field changed execute after all fields are imported into the
       given record.
   •   For more information, see Export and import data dynamically using buffers in Develop ABL Applications.

   See also
   BUFFER-EXPORT( ) method on page 81, BUFFER-IMPORT( ) method on page 87, BUFFER-EXPORT-FIELDS(
   ) method on page 83, EXPORT statement, IMPORT statement, INPUT FROM statement





BUFFER-LINES attribute
   (Character interfaces only)
   The number of lines a user can enter into the editor.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: EDITOR widget
   You can set this attribute only before the editor widget is realized. The value must be an integer expression that is equal
   to or greater than the value specified by the HEIGHT-CHARS or INNER-LINES attributes. If equal, vertical scrolling
   is disabled.
   By default, the AVM does not limit the number of enterable lines (although system limits may apply).





BUFFER-NAME attribute
   The name of the buffer object to which the buffer-field object belongs.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer-field object handle





BUFFER-PARTITION-ID attribute
   The partition ID of the partition of the buffer.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle
   If the buffer is not populated with a record, this attribute returns the Unknown value (?). If there is a record in the buffer
   but it is not for a partitioned table, the attribute returns zero (0).

   Notes
   •   If you use this attribute in a WHERE clause, it will be evaluated before the FOR EACH starts, which will result in
       no records being found unless the specified buffer is not the same as the buffer of the query or FOR EACH statement.
   •   The partition ID is only unique within a given table.

   See also
   BUFFER-PARTITION-ID function, IS-PARTITIONED attribute on page 286






BUFFER-RELEASE( ) method
   Releases a record from a buffer object. The BUFFER-RELEASE() method corresponds to the RELEASE statement
   Note: To delete the buffer object, use the DELETE OBJECT statement.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Buffer object handle

   Syntax

       BUFFER-RELEASE ( )

   If a record has been modified, this method causes a WRITE event and executes all related WRITE triggers.
   If successful, this method returns TRUE. Otherwise, it returns FALSE. If the validation fails on a newly-created record,
   this method returns FALSE and raises the ERROR condition.
   Note: The BUFFER-RELEASE() method cannot be used together with other assignments in a single ASSIGN statement.






BUFFER-TENANT-ID attribute
   The tenant ID (as an integer) of the tenant that owns the current record in the buffer specified by a buffer handle.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle
   If the buffer is not populated with a record, this attribute returns the Unknown value (?). If the buffer is for a shared
   table, a temp-table, or for the default tenant of a multi-tenant table, this attribute returns the value zero (0).
   If the buffer contains a record for a tenant group and the user is a super tenant, this attribute returns the tenant ID of one
   of the members of the group. The tenant ID returned is indeterminate, but is always the tenant ID of a tenant in the
   group.
   For a regular tenant, the record in the buffer always belongs to that tenant. So, this attribute always returns the user's
   own tenant ID. This is true even if the record belongs to a tenant group.

   Notes
   •   This attribute can be used in a WHERE or TENANT-WHERE option as long as the specified buffer is not the same
       as the buffer of the query or FOR EACH statement.
   •   This attribute can be used by database triggers on the buffers passed to the trigger to get the tenant ID of these buffers.
       This allows the application provider to code tenant-specific database triggers.

   See also
   BUFFER-TENANT-ID function, BUFFER-TENANT-NAME attribute on page 93





BUFFER-TENANT-NAME attribute
   The name of the tenant (as a character string) that owns the current record in the buffer specified by a buffer handle.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle
   If the buffer is not populated with a record, this attribute returns the Unknown value (?). If the buffer is for a shared
   table or a temp-table, this attribute returns the empty string ("").
   If the buffer contains a record that belongs to a tenant group and the user is a super tenant, this attribute returns the tenant
   name of one of the members of the group. The tenant name returned is indeterminate, but is always the name of a tenant
   in the group.
   For a regular tenant user, the record in the buffer always belongs to that tenant. So, the attribute always returns the user's
   own tenant name. This is true even if the record belongs to a tenant group.
   Note: This attribute can be used in a WHERE or TENANT-WHERE option as long as the specified buffer is not the
   same as the buffer of the query or FOR EACH statement.

   See also
   BUFFER-TENANT-NAME function





BUFFER-VALIDATE( ) method
   Verifies that a record in a buffer object complies with mandatory field and unique index definitions. The
   BUFFER-VALIDATE() method corresponds to the VALIDATE statement.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Buffer object handle

   Syntax

       BUFFER-VALIDATE ( )


   If a field or table has been modified, this method causes a WRITE event and executes all related WRITE triggers.
   If successful, this method returns TRUE. Otherwise, it returns FALSE.
   If the validation fails on a newly-created record, this method returns FALSE and raises the ERROR condition. The
   record is not released and the lock status remains the same as before the BUFFER-VALIDATE().
   Note: The BUFFER-VALIDATE() method cannot be used together with other assignments in a single ASSIGN
   statement.





BUFFER-VALUE( ) method
   The current value of a buffer-field object. If you modify the BUFFER-VALUE(), the AVM sets the
   buffer-field object to the new value.
   Data type: The data type of the corresponding buffer-field
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Buffer-field object handle

   Syntax

       BUFFER-VALUE [ ( [ i ] ) ]


   i
              An integer expression representing a subscript, for fields that are arrays.
   Note: The parentheses after the method name are only required for array fields. For non-array fields, you can omit the
   parentheses. In this case, the syntax resembles an attribute and is more readable.
   The syntax for reading and writing the value of a buffer-field object using a dynamic reference to a table field in
   a dynamic ProDataSet, temp-table, query, or buffer object can be awkward, especially when you know the table and
   field names at compile time. ABL provides a simpler way to express the same syntax, only in a short-hand form using
   a double colon (::). Both the long- and short-hand forms are shown in the following examples.

   Examples
   The following code shows the syntax for reading the CustNum buffer field in the Customer table through a ProDataSet
   handle:

       /* Long-hand syntax */
       hDSet:GET-BUFFER-HANDLE("ttcust"):BUFFER-FIELD("CustNum"):BUFFER-VALUE( )

       /* Short-hand syntax */
       hDSet::ttcust::CustNum


   The following code shows the syntax for writing a value to the State buffer field in the ttcust temp-table through
   a ProDataSet handle:

       /* Long-hand syntax */
       hDSet:GET-BUFFER-HANDLE("ttcust"):BUFFER-FIELD("State"):BUFFER-VALUE = "MA".

       /* Short-hand syntax */
       hDSet::ttcust::State = "MA".


   The following code shows the syntax for reading the first element of the Month-Quota array buffer field in the
   ttsalesrep temp-table through a ProDataSet handle:

       /* Long-hand syntax */
       hDSet:GET-BUFFER-HANDLE("ttsalesrep"):BUFFER-FIELD("Month-Quota"):BUFFER-VALUE(1).

       /* Short-hand syntax */
       hDSet::ttsalesrep::Month-Quota(1)

   The following code shows the syntax for writing the first element of the Month-Quota array buffer field in the
   ttsalesrep temp-table through a ProDataSet handle:

     /* Long-hand syntax */
     hDSet:GET-BUFFER-HANDLE("ttsalesrep"):BUFFER-FIELD("Month-Quota"):BUFFER-VALUE(1)
      = 100.

     /* Short-hand syntax */
     hDSet::ttsalesrep::Month-Quota(1) = 100.


   Note: Progress Software Corporation recommends that you do not set the call object's CALL-TYPE attribute to
   SET-ATTR-CALL-TYPE to set a Buffer-field object's BUFFER-VALUE() method return value, since there in no way
   to run triggers for the target field.

   See also
   LITERAL-QUESTION attribute on page 299






BYTES-READ attribute
   Returns the number of bytes read from the socket via the last READ( ) method. If the last READ( ) method failed, this
   attribute will return 0.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Socket object handle





BYTES-WRITTEN attribute
   Returns the number of bytes written to the socket via the last WRITE( ) method. If the last WRITE( ) method failed,
   this attribute will return 0.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Socket object handle





CACHE attribute
   Specifies how many records a NO-LOCK query should hold in memory.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Query object handle

   Note
   The CACHE attribute corresponds to the CACHE option of the DEFINE QUERY statement.





CALL-NAME attribute
   The name of one of the following:
   •   An external procedure, internal procedure, or user-defined function you want to invoke dynamically
   •   A Windows DLL routine or Unix shared library routine you want to invoke dynamically
   •   An attribute you want to get or set dynamically
   •   A method you want to run dynamically
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writable
   Applies to: Call object handle

   Syntax

       CALL-NAME [ = char-expression ]


   char-expression
              A CHARACTER expression indicating the name of the procedure, user-defined function, attribute,
              method, or shared library routine. The default is the Unknown value (?). In Windows, the expression
              cannot contain characters outside of the non-Unicode code page. See Internationalize ABL Applications
              for more information about Unicode and code pages.
   If char-expression is a procedure, the rules for finding the procedure are the same as those of the RUN statement,
   including the treatment of SUPER. However, the actual instance of the file, procedure name, or attribute is not determined
   until the dynamic invoke is executed.
   If char-expression is a user-defined function, an attribute, or a method, the rules for finding the function or attribute are
   the same as those for finding a function or attribute invoked statically.
   If char-expression is a shared library routine, at least the following attributes must be set:
   •   CALL-NAME or ORDINAL
   •   CALL-TYPE
   •   LIBRARY
   •   RETURN-VALUE-DLL-TYPE
   If char-expression is a shared library routine and LIBRARY specifies a full path name, the AVM searches only that
   path for the shared library. Otherwise, the AVM first determines if the shared library is loaded in memory. If it is not
   loaded in memory, the AVM looks for the shared library in the current working directory. If the shared library cannot
   be found at this point:
   •   On Windows the AVM uses the standard Windows search algorithm to find the DLL, the same algorithm used to
       find Windows executable (.exe) files
   •   On UNIX the AVM continues searching for the shared library using the ABL PROPATH
   Using the call object handle, there are two alternate methods for invoking a DLL routine—either by specifying the
   routine's name with the CALL-NAME attribute or by specifying the routine's position in the DLL with the ORDINAL
   attribute. You can specify an ORDINAL value or a CALL-NAME value, but not both. Specifying an ORDINAL value
   and setting CALL-NAME at the same time causes the AVM to raise error at run time.

   See also
   ORDINAL attribute on page 358






CALL-TYPE attribute
   The type of call, which must be the dynamic version of one of the following:
   •   Invoking an external or internal procedure
   •   Invoking a user-defined function
   •   Invoking a Windows DLL routine or a Unix shared library routine
   •   Getting an attribute
   •   Setting an attribute
   •   Invoking a method
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writable
   Applies to: Call object handle
   You can use a keyword constant or an integer. The following table lists the keyword constants and integer values you
   can use.
   Table 1: Keyword constants for the CALL-TYPE attribute

   Keyword constant                                           Integer value
   PROCEDURE-CALL-TYPE                                        1
   FUNCTION-CALL-TYPE                                         2
   GET-ATTR-CALL-TYPE                                         3
   SET-ATTR-CALL-TYPE                                         4
   DLL-CALL-TYPE                                              5


   The default is PROCEDURE-CALL-TYPE.
   To get the value of an attribute or to invoke a method, set CALL-TYPE to GET-ATTR-CALL-TYPE.
   In this example, the SESSION:NUMERIC-FORMAT attribute is assigned, indicated by the CALL-TYPE value of
   SET-ATTR-CALL-TYPE:

       /* Set SESSION:NUMERIC-FORMAT to "european" */

       ASSIGN
         hCall:IN-HANDLE               =   "session"
         hCall:CALL-TYPE               =   SET-ATTR-CALL-TYPE
         hCall:CALL-NAME               =   "numeric-format"
         hCall:NUM-PARAMETERS          =   1.

       hCall:SET-PARAMETER(1, "CHARACTER", "INPUT", "european").
       hCall:INVOKE.


   Note: PSC recommends that you do not set the call object's CALL-TYPE attribute to SET-ATTR-CALL-TYPE to set
   a BUFFER-FIELD object's BUFFER-VALUE attribute, since there is no way to run triggers for the target field.






CANCEL-BREAK( ) method
   Cancels a breakpoint from a debugging session.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: DEBUGGER system handle

   Syntax

     CANCEL-BREAK ( [ procedure [ , line-number ] ] )


   procedure
               A character expression that specifies the name of the procedure for which you want to cancel a
               breakpoint. The specified procedure does not have to exist at the time the breakpoint is cancelled. If
               you do not specify procedure, the method cancels any breakpoint set on the line immediately following
               the current line. (This is different from the SET-BREAK( ) method, which sets a breakpoint on the
               next executable line.)
   line-number
             An integer expression that specifies the line number in procedure (based at line 1 of the debug listing)
             where you want to cancel the breakpoint. A positive integer greater than or equal to 1 represents a line
             number in the specified procedure file. Zero (0) or a negative integer value represents the first executable
             line of the main procedure block in the specified procedure file. If you do not specify line-number,
             the method cancels the breakpoint at the first executable line of procedure file.
   If you invoke DEBUGGER:CANCEL-BREAK ( procedure , line-number ) on the same line that is specified by procedure
   and line-number, the existing breakpoint on the specified line occurs the first time it is executed. The breakpoint is
   cancelled only on the second and succeeding executions of the line.
   To use this method, you must have the Application Debugger installed in your OpenEdge environment.






CANCEL-BUTTON attribute
   A button widget in the frame or dialog box to receive the CHOOSE event when a user cancels the current frame or
   dialog box by pressing the ESC key.
   Data type: HANDLE
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: DIALOG-BOX widget, FRAME widget
   Any other action normally associated with the ESC key is not performed. The ESC key is any key associated with the
   ESC key label.
   The CANCEL-BUTTON attribute for frames is not supported in character mode.
   If the user presses ESCAPE in a frame that has no such cancel button and the frame is part of a frame family, the AVM
   applies the CHOOSE event to the first cancel button it finds within the frame family in random order.






CANCEL-REQUESTS( ) method
   For a state-reset, state-aware, or stateless application server, this method raises a STOP condition in the context of the
   currently running asynchronous request and purges the send queue of any asynchronous requests that have not been
   executed on the specified application server.
   For a state-free application server, this method raises a STOP condition for all currently running asynchronous requests,
   and purges the send queue of any asynchronous requests that have not been executed on the specified application server.
   For Web services, this method terminates the connection to all currently running asynchronous requests and purges the
   send queue of all asynchronous requests that have not been executed on the specified Web service.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Server object handle

  Syntax

      CANCEL-REQUESTS( )


  After executing this method, at the next input-blocking state (or on executing the PROCESS EVENTS statement) event
  procedures or methods execute for the following asynchronous requests:
  •   All requests that were complete when this method executed but whose event procedures or methods have not been
      run.
  •   All currently running requests that were stopped in response to this method.
  •   All requests that were purged from the send queue, and never run.
  This method returns FALSE when the server handle is not in the connected state. (See the CONNECTED( ) method on
  page 130). Otherwise, this method returns TRUE.

  See also
  CANCEL-REQUESTS-AFTER( ) method on page 99






CANCEL-REQUESTS-AFTER( ) method
  Calls the CANCEL-REQUESTS-AFTER( ) method on the server object after the specified number of seconds have
  elapsed. When CANCEL-REQUESTS-AFTER( ) is called, all requests currently running or queued to run on the server
  object are cancelled, regardless of when they were started.
  If the method is called on a server object that already has a timer running, the timer is restarted with the new time interval,
  measured from that moment.
  If the method is called with a parameter whose value is less than or equal to zero, then the timer on that server object is
  stopped.
  Return type: LOGICAL
  Applies to: Server object handle

  Syntax

      CANCEL-REQUESTS-AFTER ( seconds )


  seconds
              This required integer parameter specifies the number of seconds before the
              CANCEL-REQUESTS-AFTER( ) method is called on the server object.
  The method returns TRUE unless an error occurs while setting the timer. In that case, the method returns FALSE, and
  the timeout is not set.

   Example
   The following simple example uses the CANCEL-REQUESTS-AFTER( ) method:

     DEFINE VARIABLE hSrv as HANDLE.
     DEFINE VARIABLE bool as BOOLEAN.

     CREATE SERVER hSrv.
     hSrv:CONNECT("-URL AppServerDC://hostName/svc").

     bool = hSrv:CANCEL-REQUESTS-AFTER(30).
     RUN foo.p ON SERVER hSrv ASYNCHRONOUS ("Hello World").

     WAIT-FOR WINDOW-CLOSE OF CURRENT-WINDOW.

   Notes
   Calling this method on a server object has no immediate effect on any asynchronous requests that are currently running
   (or queued to run) on that server object. Moreover, the length of time these requests have already been running prior to
   the call does not effect the timer.
   The method can be called before or after the asynchronous requests are run. Any asynchronous requests that are run
   after the method is called must complete before the timer expires. The time available to complete such a request depends
   on when it was executed, with respect to the CANCEL-REQUESTS-AFTER( ) method call.
   The timer has no effect on requests run synchronously during the time interval. Synchronous requests are not cancelled,
   even if they run longer than the specified timeout.
   Manually calling the CANCEL-REQUESTS-AFTER( ) method in the application program during the timeout period
   has no effect on the timer.

   See also
   CANCEL-REQUESTS( ) method on page 98






CANCELLED attribute
   Indicates if the asynchronous request was cancelled using either the CANCEL-REQUESTS( ) method or the
   DISCONNECT( ) method on the associated server handle.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Asynchronous request object handle
   If set to TRUE, the request is cancelled. Otherwise, it is pending or complete (see the COMPLETE attribute on page
   114).






CAN-CREATE attribute
   Indicates whether the ABL user has permission to insert into the database the record associated with a buffer.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle
   For information about checking permissions at compile time and run time, see Manage ABL Applications.





CAN-DELETE attribute
   Indicates whether the ABL user has permission to delete from the database the record associated with a buffer.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle
   For information about checking permissions at compile time and run time, see Manage ABL Applications.






CAN-DO-DOMAIN-SUPPORT attribute
   Indicates whether or not the CAN-DO function treats "@" as the domain delimiter in a fully qualified user ID or as a
   regular character.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writable
   Applies to: SECURITY-POLICY system handle
   If the CAN-DO-DOMAIN-SUPPORT attribute is TRUE, the CAN-DO function treats "@" as a domain delimiter in a
   fully qualified user ID, as described in the main entry for the CAN-DO function. If the attribute is FALSE, the CAN-DO
   function treats "@" as a regular character. For example:
   •   When the attribute is set to TRUE, CAN-DO("abc","abc@") evaluates to TRUE because both strings are
       interpreted as user abc in the blank domain.
   •   When the attribute is set to FALSE, CAN-DO("abc","abc@") evaluates to FALSE.
   The behavior of the CAN-DO function regarding "@" can be changed at any time in a session by setting the
   CAN-DO-DOMAIN-SUPPORT attribute appropriately. The attribute defaults to TRUE unless the -nocandodomain
   startup parameter is used, in which case the attribute defaults to FALSE. For more information on the -nocandodomain
   startup parameter, see the Startup Command and Parameter Reference.






CAN-READ attribute
   Indicates whether the ABL user has permission to read the record associated with a buffer or buffer-field.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle, Buffer-field object handle
   For information about checking permissions at compile time and run time, see Manage ABL Applications.






CAN-WRITE attribute
   Indicates whether the ABL user has permission to modify the record associated with a buffer or buffer-field.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle, Buffer-field object handle
   For information about checking permissions at compile time and run time, see Manage ABL Applications.





CAREFUL-PAINT attribute
   Indicates whether overlapping widgets in a 3D frame will refresh (repaint) carefully but more slowly (TRUE), or quickly,
   but possibly not as carefully (FALSE).
   The CarefulPaint setting in the Startup section of the progress.ini file is used to determine the initial setting of the
   CAREFUL-PAINT attribute. The default value is TRUE.
   You can set this frame attribute at any time.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writable
   Applies to: FRAME widget






CASE-SENSITIVE attribute
   Indicates whether a buffer-field is case-sensitive.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer-field object handle






CENTERED attribute
   Indicates whether the AVM automatically centers the frame in a window.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: FRAME widget
   The default value for this attribute is FALSE. When you set this attribute from FALSE to TRUE, the values of the
   COLUMN, ROW, X, and Y attributes for the frame change to reflect the new location of the frame. Setting the
   CENTERED attribute from TRUE to FALSE has no meaning and results in an error message.





CHARSET attribute
   The current setting of the Character Set (-charset) parameter.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   The CHARSET attribute returns a value that specifies the character set used for ABL data, which is either "iso8859-1"
   or "undefined". The value is set by the Character Set (-charset) parameter.
   This attribute is obsolete. See the CPINTERNAL attribute on page 139.





CHECKED attribute
   The display state for a toggle box or a toggle-box menu item.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: MENU-ITEM widget, TOGGLE-BOX widget
   When this attribute is TRUE, the center of the toggle is filled to represent the "on" state of the value associated with the
   widget. Setting this attribute to FALSE removes the fill from the center of the toggle to represent the "off" state for the
   value associated with the widget.







CHILD-BUFFER attribute
   Returns the buffer handle of the child member of the data-relation object.
   Data type: HANDLE
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Data-relation object handle






CHILD-NUM attribute
   Returns the relative number assigned to this XML node among its siblings. XML nodes that have the same parent are
   called siblings, and are numbered from 1 to the number of siblings.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: X-noderef object handle
   The Unknown value (?) is returned if the node reference does not refer to an element node, or if the node is an XML
   document node.
   The following example demonstrates the use of the CHILD-NUM attribute:

     my-index = hNoderef:CHILD-NUM.






CLASS-TYPE attribute
   Returns the class type of the most recently compiled class definition (.cls) file. If the most recently compiled file was
   not a class definition file, this attribute returns the empty string ("").
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: COMPILER system handle






CLEAR( ) method (Call Object Handle)
   Resets each attribute of a call object to its default value, which lets you reuse a call object.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Call object handle

   Syntax

     CLEAR ( )


   This method resets each attribute of a call object to its default value, which lets you reuse a call object. To reset just the
   parameters, set the NUM-PARAMETERS attribute to zero.
   Note: The return value of this method is not meaningful and should not be relied on.






CLEAR( ) method (DEBUGGER Handle)
   Initializes the internal state of the Application Debugger.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: DEBUGGER system handle

   Syntax

     CLEAR ( )


   This method has no visible effect on the Debugger window. If the Debugger is initialized, this method returns TRUE.
   Otherwise, it returns FALSE with no effect.
   Note: To use this method with the DEBUGGER system handle, you must have the Application Debugger installed in
   your OpenEdge environment.
   For more information on using this method for the Debugger, see the reference entry for the DEBUGGER system handle
   and Troubleshoot ABL Applications.






CLEAR( ) method (FILL-IN Widget)
   Clears a fill-in widget's data.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: FILL-IN widget

   Syntax

     CLEAR ( )


   This method clears a static or dynamic fill-in widget's data, but unlike the CLEAR statement, it is applied to a single
   fill-in, and it does not clear the fill-in's colors. Using this method on a frame or a field-level widget other than a fill-in
   raises an error. The method can be used in GUI or character mode.
   Note: The return value of this method is not meaningful and should not be relied on.





CLEAR( ) method (ProDataSet Object Handle)
   Removes all elements from a dynamic ProDataSet object including buffers and relations.
   Return type: LOGICAL

   Applies to: ProDataSet object handle

   Syntax

       CLEAR ( )


   This method restores the state of the dynamic ProDataSet object to what it was immediately after the CREATE DATASET
   statement.
   If an error occurs while executing the CLEAR() method, the method returns FALSE. Otherwise, it returns TRUE.
   Note: If you call CLEAR() or CREATE-LIKE() more than once on a dataset, the dynamic temp-tables from the prior
   call(s) are not deleted automatically and have the potential to cause a memory leak. Therefore the application is responsible
   for deleting the temp-tables if CLEAR() or CREATE-LIKE() are called again.





CLEAR( ) method (Temp-Table Object Handle)
   Clears temp-table definitions and removes temp-table data.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Temp-table object handle

   Syntax

       CLEAR ( )


   This method empties the temp-table and removes all its definitional data (field and index definitions and pending saved
   data). This puts the temp-table object into the CLEAR state, as opposed to the UNPREPARED or PREPARED state.
   Calling any method after this one changes the state to UNPREPARED.
   If an error occurs while executing the CLEAR( ) method, the method returns FALSE. Otherwise, it returns TRUE.






CLEAR-APPL-CONTEXT( ) method
   Clears the application context for the current session.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: AUDIT-CONTROL system handle

   Syntax

       CLEAR-APPL-CONTEXT( )


   After calling this method, the APPL-CONTEXT-ID attribute is cleared for all connected audit-enabled databases and
   is no longer recorded in audit event records for this application context.
   There can be only one active application context per session at any one point in time. To set a different application
   context for the session, you can:
   •   Call the CLEAR-APPL-CONTEXT( ) method, to clear the current application context, and then call the
       SET-APPL-CONTEXT( ) method with the new application context.
   •   Call the SET-APPL-CONTEXT( ) method with the new application context. If there is an existing application context
       in effect, the AVM clears the existing application context before setting the new application context.
   Calling this method does not generate an audit event or an audit record.
   If successful, this method returns TRUE. Otherwise, it returns FALSE.

   See also
   APPL-CONTEXT-ID attribute on page 59, SET-APPL-CONTEXT( ) method on page 446







CLEAR-LOG( ) method
   Clears all messages existing in the current client log file and leaves the file open for writing.
   Note: This method is valid only for DataServers, interactive clients, and batch clients. WebSpeed agents and application
   servers write a message to the server log file indicating that it is invalid to use the CLEAR-LOG( ) method to clear a
   WebSpeed or application server log file. In this case, the method returns FALSE.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: DSLOG-MANAGER system handle, LOG-MANAGER system handle

   Syntax

       CLEAR-LOG( )


   If the CLEAR-LOG( ) method successfully clears the open log file, it returns TRUE.
   If the CLEAR-LOG( ) method fails, it returns FALSE and displays a warning message indicating the reason for the
   failure.
   If there is no client log file, the CLEAR-LOG( ) method returns FALSE and displays a warning message that the operation
   is not valid when there is no log file.
   If you specified a log file threshold with the Log Threshold (-logthreshold) startup parameter, the CLEAR-LOG( )
   method deletes any existing log files that match the name of the LOGFILE-NAME attribute on page 319, the Client
   Logging (-clientlog) startup parameter, or the DataServer Logging (-dslog) startup parameter. The method then
   re-creates and opens the first log file in the sequence and changes the LOGFILE-NAME attribute on page 319 to reflect
   this.





CLEAR-SELECTION( ) method
   Removes the highlight from the currently selected text.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (column), COMBO-BOX widget, EDITOR widget, FILL-IN widget

   Syntax

       CLEAR-SELECTION ( )


   If the highlight is removed, the method returns TRUE. Otherwise, it returns FALSE.
   For browses, this method applies only to fill-in and combo-box browse columns.





CLEAR-SORT-ARROWS( ) method
   Clears sort-arrow indicators for all columns in a browse.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: BROWSE widget

   Syntax

     CLEAR-SORT-ARROWS ( )


   This method always returns TRUE.

   See also
   SET-SORT-ARROW( ) method on page 469






CLIENT-CONNECTION-ID attribute
   For a session-managed application, this attribute returns the connection ID for the physical application server connection
   associated with this server handle.
   For a session-free application, because there are is no single physical connection between the client and application
   server, the value of this attribute has no meaning.
   For Web services, this attribute returns the empty string.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Server object handle
   This value, assigned by the application server, accepts a connection request from a client application. The connection
   ID is used as an identifier when any information associated with the connection is logged.
   The same connection ID is available to an ABL client application using the CLIENT-CONNECTION-ID attribute and
   to the application server session servicing the client on the same connection using the SERVER-CONNECTION-ID
   attribute on the SESSION handle.
   The value of the connection ID is guaranteed to be globally unique for all time within a single computer network.
   Connection IDs can be compared to each other strictly for equality, but other types of comparisons are irrelevant.
   For a client, the connection ID of the associated application server connection remains the same until the client disconnects
   from the application server. If the client reconnects to the same application server, the connection ID of the new connection
   (and thus the value of the CLIENT-CONNECTION-ID attribute for that connection) is different from the connection
   ID of the previous connection.
   Note: You can identify client context for a user login session of a session-managed or session-free application using
   the ClientContextId property of the Progress.Lang.OERequestInfo class.






CLIENT-TTY attribute
   Returns the name of the terminal display for this user's login session. If not specified, the AVM returns a zero-length
   character string.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Client-principal object handle
   Once the client-principal object is sealed, this attribute is read-only.

   See also
   CLIENT-TTY attribute on page 107






CLIENT-TYPE attribute
   Returns the type of ABL client currently executing.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   The following table shows the value of CLIENT-TYPE for each supported client type.
   Table 2: CLIENT-TYPE attribute values

   Type of client                                                 Attribute value
   Standard ABL client                                            4GLCLIENT
   WebClient                                                      WEBCLIENT
   AppServer agent                                                APPSERVER
   WebSpeed agent                                                 WEBSPEED
   Progress Application Server agent                              MULTI-SESSION-AGENT
   Other special-purpose clients                                  Unknown value (?)







CLIENT-WORKSTATION attribute
   The name of the host workstation on which the user, represented by the client-principal object, is working. If not specified,
   the AVM returns a zero-length character string.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Client-principal object handle
   Once the client-principal object is sealed, this attribute is read-only.

   See also
   CLIENT-TTY attribute on page 107






CLONE-NODE( ) method
   Clone the XML node referred to by a node reference. The first parameter must be a valid X-noderef handle and refers
   to the new cloned XML node if the method succeeds. The new node is associated with the same document, but needs
   to be inserted with INSERT-BEFORE( ) or APPEND-CHILD( ) to become part of the document structure.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: X-noderef object handle

   Syntax

     CLONE-NODE ( x-node-handle , deep )


   x-node-handle
             A valid X-noderef handle to use for the new XML node.
   deep
               A logical that if TRUE specifies that the whole sub-tree is to be cloned. The default value is FALSE.
   The following example demonstrates the use of the CLONE-NODE( ) method to clone an entire sub-tree:

     hOldNode:CLONE-NODE(hNewNode,true).







CLOSE-LOG( ) method
   Closes the current log file, which stops an interactive or batch client from writing messages to the log file.
   The CLOSE-LOG( ) method writes a message to the log file indicating that the client intentionally closed the log file,
   so that the user knows why there are no more messages in the log file.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: LOG-MANAGER system handle

   Syntax

     CLOSE-LOG( )


   If the CLOSE-LOG( ) method successfully closes the open log file, it returns TRUE.
   If the CLOSE-LOG( ) method fails, it returns FALSE and displays a warning message indicating the reason for the
   failure.
   If there is no client log file, the CLOSE-LOG( ) method returns TRUE and does not display a warning message.
   Note: This method is valid only for interactive and batch clients. Application servers write a message to the server log
   file indicating that it is invalid to use the CLOSE-LOG( ) method to close an application server log file. In this case, the
   method returns FALSE. Unlike the other LOG-MANAGER methods, you cannot use this method with the
   DSLOG-MANAGER system handle.





CODE attribute
   A numeric code associated with the last event.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: LAST-EVENT system handle
   For keyboard and mouse events (EVENT-TYPE attribute set to "KEYPRESS" or "MOUSE"), this is the key code. For
   high-level ABL events (EVENT-TYPE attribute set to "PROGRESS"), this is a unique numeric value greater than the
   key code values. For information on key codes, see the topics on handling user input in OpenEdge Programming
   Interfaces.
   If a mouse event is high-level mouse event (for example, MOUSE-SELECT-CLICK), this attribute is set to the key
   code of the low-level mouse event (for example, MOUSE-SELECT-UP) that triggered the high-level event. To determine
   the triggered high-level event, you must also check the value of the FUNCTION attribute, in this case
   "MOUSE-SELECT-CLICK".






CODEPAGE attribute
   The code page of specified r-code.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: RCODE-INFO handle
   This attribute references the code page of the strings in the text segment. The code page value is written to the r-code
   file when the file is saved. ABL uses the code page specified by the R-code Out Code Page (-cprcodeout) startup
   parameter to write the r-code text segment. If -cprcodeout is not specified, ABL uses the value of the Internal Code Page
   (CPINTERNAL) SESSION handle.
   For a file that is session compiled, the return value is the Unknown value (?).






COLUMN attribute
   The column position of the left edge of the widget or the column position of the mouse cursor for the last mouse event
   on the display.
   Data type: DECIMAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (browse and column), BUTTON widget, COMBO-BOX widget, CONTROL-FRAME
   widget, DIALOG-BOX widget, EDITOR widget, FIELD-GROUP widget, FILL-IN widget, FRAME widget, IMAGE
   widget, LAST-EVENT system handle, LITERAL widget, RADIO-SET widget, RECTANGLE widget, SELECTION-LIST
   widget, SLIDER widget, TEXT widget, TOGGLE-BOX widget, WINDOW widget
   For browse cells, field groups, and the LAST-EVENT handle, it is readable only.
   For all widgets except windows, the COLUMN attribute specifies the location, in character units, of the left edge of the
   widget relative to the left edge of its parent widget. In windows, the location is relative to the left edge of the display.
   For browse columns, the COLUMN attribute returns the Unknown value (?) if the column is hidden.
   For control-frames, the COLUMN attribute maps to the Left property of the control-frame COM object (ActiveX control
   container).
   For the LAST-EVENT handle, the COLUMN attribute specifies the column location, in character units, of the last mouse
   event relative to the left edge of the current frame.
   This attribute is functionally equivalent to the X attribute.






COLUMN-BGCOLOR attribute
   The color number of the background color for the columns in a browse widget.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (column)
   The color number represents an entry in the color table maintained by the COLOR-TABLE handle.






COLUMN-DCOLOR attribute
   (Character interfaces only)
   The number of the display color of a column.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (column)
   Overrides the color specified for the entire browse widget to display a single column in the specified color.
   The color number represents an entry in the color table maintained by the COLOR-TABLE handle.






COLUMN-FGCOLOR attribute
   The color number of the foreground color for the columns in a browse widget.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (column)
   The color number represents an entry in the color table maintained by the COLOR-TABLE handle.






COLUMN-FONT attribute
   (Graphical interfaces only)
   The font for the columns in a browse widget.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (column)
   The font number represents an entry in the font table maintained by the FONT-TABLE handle.






COLUMN-LABEL attribute
   A text string that describes a column of data associated with a buffer-field.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Buffer-field object handle





COLUMN-MOVABLE attribute
   (Graphical interfaces only)
   Indicates whether you can move a browse column by pointing, clicking, and dragging.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget
   If COLUMN-MOVABLE is TRUE, you can move any of the browse's browse columns by pointing, clicking, and
   dragging on a column label. This attribute lets you turn on and off the ability of end users to move browse columns. IF
   COLUMN-MOVABLE is TRUE, the START-MOVE and END-MOVE events for the browse column take precedence
   over all other events. That is, while this attribute is TRUE, searching on columns is suspended, and the AVM interprets
   the MOUSE-DOWN event as the column move.
   The COLUMN-MOVABLE attribute has no effect on the MOVE-COLUMN( ) method, which lets you move a browse
   column programmatically.
   For updateable browses, if a browse column moves, its tab order changes.
   When you set a browse's COLUMN-MOVABLE attribute to a certain value, the AVM automatically sets the MOVABLE
   attribute of the browse's browse columns to the same value. For more information on the MOVABLE attribute, see the
   MOVABLE attribute on page 336 reference entry.






COLUMN-PFCOLOR attribute
   (Character interfaces only)
   The color number for the display color of a column with input focus.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (column)
   Overrides the color specified for the entire browse widget to display a single column in the specified color.
   The color number represents an entry in the color table maintained by the COLOR-TABLE handle.






COLUMN-READ-ONLY attribute
   Indicates whether you can tab to a browse column but not edit it.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (column)
   Setting the COLUMN-READ-ONLY attribute to TRUE allows the user to select and copy the browse cell contents despite
   being read-only. The READ-ONLY attribute does not allow this functionality.
   For combo-box and toggle-box browse columns, setting the COLUMN-READ-ONLY attribute to TRUE is treated the
   same as setting the READ-ONLY attribute to TRUE.
   Note: The COLUMN-READ-ONLY attribute of the browse column corresponds to the READ-ONLY attribute on page
   384 of the fill-in, while the READ-ONLY attribute of the browse column corresponds to the SENSITIVE attribute on
   page 437 of the fill-in.






COLUMN-RESIZABLE attribute
   (Graphical interfaces only)
   Indicates whether you can resize a browse column by pointing, clicking, and dragging.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget
   If COLUMN-RESIZABLE is TRUE, you can resize any of the browse's browse columns by pointing, clicking, and
   dragging on a column separator. This attribute lets you turn on and off the ability of end users to resize browse columns.
   IF COLUMN-RESIZABLE is TRUE, the START-RESIZE and END-RESIZE events for the browse column take
   precedence over all other events.
   When you set a browse's COLUMN-RESIZABLE attribute to a certain value, the AVM automatically sets the
   RESIZABLE attribute of the browse's browse columns to the same value. For more information on the RESIZABLE
   attribute, see the RESIZABLE attribute on page 411 reference entry.
   If you add the ResizeinCell option to the [Startup] section of the progress.ini file and set it to NO, you limit the
   user's ability to change the browse column size to only at the column label cell's separator. If a column does not have a
   label, the user cannot change the size of that column.
   If the ResizeinCell option is set to YES, you get the default behavior where the user can change the column size at any
   place on the column separator.






COLUMN-SCROLLING attribute
   (Windows only)
   The horizontal scrolling behavior of a browse widget.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget
   If the COLUMN-SCROLLING attribute is TRUE, horizontal scrolling for the browse widget moves in whole-column
   increments. If a column is wider than the browse widget, you cannot see the text if the right side of the column, but you
   can still scroll to the next column.
   If the attribute is FALSE, horizontal scrolling for the browse widget moves in increments equal to the pixel width of
   the average character in the current browse font. In this case, if a column is wider than the browse, you can view it by
   scrolling through the column in these increments.
   The default value is TRUE for a static browse, and FALSE for a dynamic browse.






COM-HANDLE attribute
   (Windows only)
   The component handle to the control-frame COM object.
   Data type: COM-HANDLE
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: CONTROL-FRAME widget
   This handle provides access to the ActiveX control container (COM object) associated with the control-frame. You can
   use this, in turn, to access control-frame COM object properties and methods.
   For information on the properties and methods on the control-frame COM object, see the CONTROL-FRAME widget
   reference entry. For information on accessing COM object properties and methods, see Accessing COM object properties
   and methods on page 33.





COMPLETE attribute
   Indicates if the asynchronous request is completed and its result is processed on the client.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Asynchronous request object handle
   If set to FALSE, the PROCEDURE-COMPLETE event on this handle has not yet been returned from the application
   server running the request. This attribute is set to TRUE when the application server returns the
   PROCEDURE-COMPLETE event and immediately before any specified event procedure or method executes.






CONFIG-NAME attribute
   The WebSpeed service name. This method is called by the get-config WebSpeed API function. Intended for internal
   use only.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: WEB-CONTEXT system handle






CONNECT( ) method (AppServer)
   Physically connects and associates an AppServer instance, or logically connects an application service, with the specified
   server handle. The current application becomes a client application of the connected AppServer.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Server object handle

   Syntax

     CONNECT ( {        connection-parms }
               [        , userid ]
               [        , password ]
               [        , app-server-info ] )


   connection-parms
             A character string containing a space-separated list of one or more connection parameters necessary
             to establish an AppServer connection. These parameters include two types:
               •   A basic set used to connect to an AppServer instance or application service, regardless of the
                   session model
               •   A set for specifying and managing the session model of the connection
               The following table describes the basic connection parameters you must specify to connect to an
               AppServer instance or application service, regardless of the session model.
  
                Table 3: AppServer basic connection parameters

                Connection parameter1                        Description
                -AppService application-service              If you connect through a NameServer, the name of an
                                                             Application Service supported by the specified
                                                             NameServer. (Defaults to the default service for the
                                                             specified Name Server.) If you connect directly to an
                                                             AppServer, this parameter is ignored.
                                                             The network address to a NameServer machine or, if
                  -H [ host_name | IP-address
                   ]                                         you connect directly, to an AppServer machine. You
                                                             can specify either the TCP/IP host name or the Internet
                                                             protocol address of the machine. (Defaults to
                                                             localhost)
                                                             The UDP port number for a NameServer, or, if you
                  -S [ service-name |
                  port-number ]                              connect directly, the TCP/IP port number for an
                                                             AppServer connection. You can specify either an
                                                             explicit port number or a service name. If you use a
                                                             service name, the method uses the port number
                                                             associated with that name in the TCP/IP services file.
                                                             (Defaults to 5162)
                -DirectConnect                               If specified, the -H and -S parameters are interpreted
                                                             as the network address and TCP/IP port number of an
                                                             AppServer connection. Otherwise, the -H and -S
                                                             parameters are interpreted as the network address and
                                                             UDP port number of a NameServer.
                -ssl                                         If specified, the connection is direct to the AppServer
                                                             using Transport Layer Security(TLS) tunneling.
                                                             (Used in conjunction with the -AppService, -H,
                                                             and -S parameters).
                                                             Note: Be sure you need TLS before using this option.
                                                             TLS incurs more or less heavy performance penalties,
                                                             depending on resources and load.

                -nosessionreuse                              If specified, the connection does not reuse the TLS
                                                             session ID when reconnecting to the same TLS-enabled
                                                             server (either a Web server with HTTPS or a
                                                             TLS-enabled AppServer).
                -nohostverify                                If specified, turns off host verification for a
                                                             TLS-enabled connection, either using HTTPS with the
                                                             AIA or using a direct connection to a TLS-enabled
                                                             AppServer. Without this parameter specified, the client
                                                             compares the host name specified in the connection
                                                             with the Common Name specified in the server
                                                             certificate, and raises an error if they do not match.
                                                             With this parameter specified, the client never raises
                                                             the error. For more information, see Learn about
                                                             Security and Auditing.
1
    Previous versions of the AppServer allow you to include a network protocol using the -N parameter, which must always
    specify TCP. While still allowed, it is optional and always defaults to TCP/IP.
Connection parameter1                       Description
-pf filename                                A text file containing any of the other AppServer
                                            connection parameters described in this table or Table
                                            4: AppServer session model connection parameters on
                                            page 117. If this file contains any other OpenEdge
                                            startup parameters, the method ignores them.
-AppServerKeepalive capstr                  Indicates that the client would like to employ the
                                            AppServer Keepalive protocol on this connection, if
                                            supported and enabled by the AppServer. To enable
                                            the protocol, specify the allowServerASK value
                                            for capstr. To disable the protocol, specify
                                            denyServerASK.
                                            The default value is allowServerASK.
                                            The absence of this property indicates that the default
                                            value for the ServerASK protocol will be used on this
                                            connection.

-URL Web-or-AppServer-path                  An HTTP (or HTTPS-based) URL to an AIA (for an
                                            Internet-secure AppServer connection) or an
                                            AppServer-based URL (with or without TLS tunneling
                                            for a TLS-enabled AppServer connection).
                                            Note: Be sure you need TLS (either, and especially
                                            both, an HTTPS or TLS-enabled AppServer) before
                                            using this option. TLS at any point in a networked
                                            application incurs more or less heavy performance
                                            penalties, depending on resources and load.

-clientConnectTimeout nMilliseconds         The number of milliseconds to wait before timing out
                                            each connection attempt.


Note: Connections to an Internet-secure (HTTPS) or TLS-enabled AppServer require the management
of public keys on the client (TLS client) and private keys on the server (TLS server). For an
Internet-secure AppServer, the TLS server is the Web server that hosts the AIA. For a TLS-enabled
AppServer, the TLS server is the AppServer itself. For information on configuring a Web server for
HTTPS, see your Web server documentation. For information on managing private key and digital
certificate stores for TLS clients and servers, see Learn about Security and Auditing.
The following table describes connection parameters for specifying and managing the session model
of the connection.

Table 4: AppServer session model connection parameters

Connection parameter        Session model/ default   Description
-sessionModel sessionModel Session-managed           Session model supported by the
                                                     AppServer operating mode, specified
                            Session-free
                                                     by one of the following values:
                                                     •   Session-managed
                                                     •   Session-free
                                                     This value is not case sensitive.
                                                     This parameter is required for
                                                     session-free applications and is
                                                     optional for session-managed
                                                     applications.
                                                     This value must match the AppServer
                                                     operating mode or the CONNECT( )
                                                     method fails.
                                                     The default value is
                                                     Session-managed.

-connectionLifetime         Session-free             The maximum number of seconds that
nSeconds                                             a given connection can be used before
                                                     it is destroyed. Connections whose
                                                     lifetime exceeds the specified value
                                                     are destroyed as they become
                                                     available.
                                                     An available connection is one that is
                                                     not currently reserved to run a request.
                                                     Bound connections associated with
                                                     remote persistent procedures are not
                                                     available for re-use until the persistent
                                                     procedure is deleted. So, bound
                                                     connections remain available as long
                                                     as necessary, even if they exceed the
                                                     specified value.
                                                     The default value is 300 seconds.

-initialConnections         Session-free             The number of connections
nConnections                                         established when the CONNECT( )
                                                     method executes on a given server
                                                     handle. The value must be greater than
                                                     zero. If the specified number of
                                                     connections cannot be created, the
                                                     CONNECT( ) method fails and any
                                                     successfully-created connections are
                                                     closed.
                                                     The default value is 1.
                                                             
Connection parameter         Session model/ default   Description
-maxConnections              Session-free             The maximum number of connections
nConnections                                          that can be created for a given server
                                                      handle to execute non-persistent
                                                      external procedures. The value must
                                                      be greater than or equal to zero. If this
                                                      value is zero, there is no limit to the
                                                      number of connections that can be
                                                      created.
                                                      Note: For calls to persistent
                                                      procedures, their internal procedures,
                                                      and user-defined functions, the client
                                                      has no limit on the number of
                                                      connections that can be created.
                                                      The default value is 0.

-nsClientMaxPort portNum Session-managed              The maximum value for the UDP port
                                                      number used by the client when
                             Session-free
                                                      communicating with the NameServer.
                                                      If this value is zero, the AVM chooses
                                                      the NameServer client port randomly.
                                                      This value should be greater than or
                                                      equal to the value of the
                                                      -nsClientMinPort parameter.
                                                      The default value is 0.

-nsClientMinPort portNum Session-managed              The minimum value for the UDP port
                                                      number used by the client when
                             Session-free
                                                      communicating with the NameServer.
                                                      If this value is zero, the AVM chooses
                                                      the NameServer client port randomly.
                                                      The default value is 0.

-nsClientPicklistExpiration Session-free              The maximum amount of time, in
nSeconds                                              seconds, that the client retains an
                                                      AppServer pick list for an application
                                                      service.
                                                      The default value is 300.

-nsClientPicklistSize        Session-free             The number of AppServer picks to
nPicks                                                request from the NameServer each
                                                      time it looks up the available
                                                      AppServer connections for a given
                                                      application service name.
                                                      The default value is 1.

-nsClientPortRetry           Session-managed          The maximum number of attempts
nRetries                                              that the client makes to get a valid
                             Session-free
                                                      local UDP port number when
                                                      attempting to communicate with the
                                                      NameServer.
                                                      The default value is 0.

               Connection parameter                 Session model/ default     Description
               -nsClientDelay                       Session-managed            The interval, in milliseconds, that the
               nMilliSeconds                                                   client waits between attempts to get a
                                                    Session-free
                                                                               valid UDP port number when
                                                                               attempting to communicate with the
                                                                               NameServer.
                                                                               The default value is 0.


               Note that the actual AppServer that the client connects to is controlled by the NameServer based on
               the application service (-AppService) name specified by the client. The ABL interface in cooperation
               with the NameServer connect the client application to one of the AppServer instances that supports
               the specified application service. If you do not specify an application service, the NameServer uses
               whatever AppServer registers itself as the default service, if any.
               If the application service is unknown to the NameServer, the client application receives an error.
               Otherwise, the connection proceeds and any configured Connect procedure executes for the connected
               AppServer.
   [ userid ][ , password][ , app-server-info]
               From one to three character string parameters passed as input to the AppServer Connect procedure.
               The possible values that you can specify for these parameters are determined by the Connect procedure
               for the AppServer application. If you omit a parameter, it defaults to the Unknown value (?).
   If an error occurs while executing the CONNECT( ) method, the method returns FALSE. Otherwise, it returns TRUE.
   An error can occur if:
   •   The server handle is invalid.
   •   One of the parameters contains an invalid value.
   •   One of the values specified in the connection-parms parameter is invalid.
   •   The Name Server cannot be located.
   •   The specified Application Service is not registered to a NameServer.
   •   The client application cannot connect to the AppServer selected by the NameServer.
   •   The AppServer selected by the NameServer cannot allocate a connection for the client application.
   •   The AppServer executes a Connect procedure that terminates with a STOP condition, a QUIT condition, or after
       executing a RETURN ERROR statement.
   If the CONNECT( ) method completes successfully, the CONNECTED( ) method on page 130 returns TRUE.
   The connection lasts until the client application executes the server handle DISCONNECT( ) method or until the AVM
   detects any failure conditions that automatically terminate the connection.
   The -URL connection parameter allows you to connect to an AppServer using the AppServer Internet Adapter (AIA)
   with the following protocols: HTTP and HTTPS.






CONNECT( ) method (Progress Application Server for OpenEdge)
   Connects and associates an instance of the Progress Application Server (PAS) for OpenEdge with the specified server
   handle and defines the application session model for the connection. This allows a client program to run remote procedures
   on a PAS for OpenEdge instance. The CONNECT() method requires the host and port to connect to and the application
   server transport value (apsv) in a URL format. Optionally you can specify a web application name, userid, password,
   and other connection parameters. The CONNECT() method returns TRUE if it completes successfully.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Server object handle
Syntax

  CONNECT ( {connection-parms} [,userid] [,password] [,app-server-info] )


connection-parms
          A character string containing a space-separated list of one or more connection parameters necessary
          to establish a connection to the instance.
          Table 5: PAS for OpenEdge connection parameters

            Connection parameter                       Required Description
            -URL                                        Yes    The URL of the server to which you are
            scheme://host:port/[web-app-name/]transport        connecting, where:
                                                               scheme — Is either HTTP or HTTPS.
                                                               host — Specifies the name or domain of the host.
                                                               port — Specifies the port for the host connection
                                                               that the instance is running on.
                                                               web-app-name — Specifies the OpenEdge ABL
                                                               web application to connect with. If web-app-name
                                                               is not specified, a connection to the default
                                                               OpenEdge ABL web application (ROOT) is used.
                                                               transport — Specifies the ABL client (or Open
                                                               Client) transport. Must be apsv.

            -clientConnectTimeout                      No      The number of milliseconds to wait before timing
            nMilliseconds                                      out each connection attempt.
            -connectionLifetime                        No      The maximum number of seconds that a given
            nSeconds                                           connection can be used before it is destroyed.
                                                               Connections whose lifetime exceeds the specified
                                                               value are destroyed as they become available.
                                                               An available connection is one that is not currently
                                                               reserved to run a request. Bound connections
                                                               associated with remote persistent procedures are
                                                               not available for re-use until the persistent
                                                               procedure is deleted. So, bound connections
                                                               remain available as long as necessary, even if they
                                                               exceed the specified value.
                                                               The default value is 300 seconds.
                                                               This parameter is only applicable if
                                                               -sessionModel session-free is used.

            -initialConnections                        No      The number of connections established when the
            nConnections                                       CONNECT( ) method executes on a given server
                                                               handle. The value must be greater than zero. If the
                                                               specified number of connections cannot be
                                                               created, the CONNECT( ) method fails and any
                                                               successfully-created connections are closed.
                                                               The default value is 1.
                                                               This parameter is only applicable if
                                                               -sessionModel session-free is used.
                                                     
Connection parameter     Required Description
-maxConnections          No      The maximum number of connections that can be
nConnections                     created for a given server handle to execute
                                 non-persistent external procedures. The value must
                                 be greater than or equal to zero. If this value is
                                 zero, there is no limit to the number of connections
                                 that can be created.
                                 Note: For calls to persistent procedures, their
                                 internal procedures, and user-defined functions,
                                 the client has no limit on the number of
                                 connections that can be created.
                                 The default value is 0.
                                 This parameter is only applicable if
                                 -sessionModel session-free is used.

-nohostverify            No      Turns off host verification for an HTTPS
                                 connection. If host and the Common Name from
                                 the server certificate do not match, no error is
                                 raised and the secure encrypted connection is still
                                 made if all other certificate information is correct.
                                 If the parameter is not specified and host does not
                                 match the server certificate, an error is raised. See
                                 Learn about Security and Auditing for more
                                 information.
-nosessionreuse          No      Does not reuse the TLS session ID when
                                 reconnecting over HTTPS to the same instance.
-pf filename             No      Specifies a parameter file containing additional
                                 connection parameters. The parameters allowed
                                 are described in Table 4: AppServer session model
                                 connection parameters on page 117. If filename
                                 contains other OpenEdge startup parameters, they
                                 are ignored by this method
-servername servername   No      Specifies the server name to be used during the
                                 initialization of a TLS connection. This can be
                                 used to support Server Name Indication (SNI) .
                                 Note: Server Name Indication (SNI) allows the
                                 client to add the hostname that it attempts to
                                 connect to during the handshake as a part of the
                                 TLS negotiation. It enables the server to select the
                                 required domain name and present the certificate
                                 with the correct name. It also allows the server to
                                 present multiple certificates on the same IP
                                 address and TCP port number and thus allows
                                 multiple secure (HTTPS) websites (or any other
                                 Service over TLS) to be served off the same IP
                                 address without requiring all those sites to use the
                                 same certificate.


             Connection parameter                      Required Description
             -sessionModel option                      No         Specifies the application session model required
                                                                  by the ABL client for this connection. It can be
                                                                  one of two options:
                                                                  •   Session-managed
                                                                  •   Session-free
                                                                  This value is not case sensitive.
                                                                  Session-managed is the default.


            The client determines the application session model that the instance uses for each connection, because
            ABL sessions run using any application model that a given client requires.
            Connections to an Internet-secure (HTTPS) instance require the management of digital certificate
            stores for public keys on the client (TLS client) and private keys on an instance (TLS server). For
            information on configuring for HTTPS connections, see the Manage Progress Application Server for
            OpenEdge. For information on using TLS to secure the client side of a PAS for OpenEdge application,
            see the Progress Application Server for OpenEdge: Application Migration and Development Guide.
            For information on managing digital certificate stores for OpenEdge TLS clients, see Learn about
            Security and Auditing.
userid
            Optional string parameter containing the userid to connect with. It is passed as input to the instance's
            Connect procedure.
password
            Optional string parameter containing the password to connect with. It is passed as input to the instance's
            Connect procedure.
app-server-info
           Optional string parameter containing application server information. It is passed as input to the instance's
           Connect procedure.
Possible values for userid, password, and app-server-info are determined by the Connect procedure for the business
application. The Connect procedure is specified by the sessionConnectProc property in the instance's
openedge.properties file. If any of these parameters are omitted, the Unknown value (?) is passed.

Example
The following is an example of creating a session-free connection to an OpenEdge ABL web application named
GeneralLedger on a local instance:

  DEFINE VARIABLE happsrv AS HANDLE NO-UNDO.

  CREATE SERVER happsrv.
  IF happsrv:CONNECT("-URL http://localhost:8810/GeneralLedger/apsv
                       -sessionModel session-free") THEN
  DO:
       /* Some accounting work on the local PAS for OpenEdge instance */
  END.

Notes
If an error occurs while executing the CONNECT() method, the method returns FALSE. Some conditions for which an
error can occur include:
   •   The server handle is invalid.
   •   One of the parameters contains an invalid value.
   •   One of the values specified in the connection-parms parameter is invalid.
   •   The instance executes a Connect procedure that terminates with a STOP condition, a QUIT condition, or after
       executing a RETURN ERROR statement.
   The connection lasts until the client application executes the server handle DISCONNECT() method or until the server
   session detects any failure conditions that automatically terminate the connection.
   For more information on PAS for OpenEdge Connect procedures, see the Progress Application Server for OpenEdge:
   Application Migration and Development Guide.






CONNECT( ) method (Socket object)
   Connects a socket to the specified TCP/IP port on the specified host.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Socket object handle

   Syntax

       CONNECT ( [ connection-parms ] )


   connection-parms
             A character string expression that contains a space-separated list of one or more socket connection
             parameters.
              The following table describes each socket connection parameter, which can be included in this string.
              Table 6: Socket connection parameters

               Parameter                             Description
               -clientConnectTimeout                 Optional. The number of milliseconds to wait before
               nMilliseconds                         timing out each connection attempt.
               -H socket-address                     Optional. The host name or IP address to which the
                                                     connection is to be established.
               -nohostverify                         If specified, turns off host verification for a TLS-enabled
                                                     connection to a server socket. Without this parameter
                                                     specified, the client compares the host name specified
                                                     in the connection with the Common Name specified in
                                                     the server certificate, and raises an error if they do not
                                                     match. With this parameter specified, the client never
                                                     raises the error. For more information, see Learn about
                                                     Security and Auditing.

Parameter                       Description
-nosessionreuse                 If specified, the connection does not reuse the TLS
                                session ID when reconnecting to the same TLS-enabled
                                server socket.
                                Note: OpenEdge TLS turns on TLS session reuse by
                                default. So, after the initial connection to a given host
                                (-H) and port (-S), each subsequent connection to the
                                same host and port restarts the TLS session and ignores
                                any different connection parameters that are specified
                                for the subsequent connection, including
                                -nosessionreuse. If you want to change TLS socket
                                options (such as -nohostverify) for each subsequent
                                connection to a given host and port, be sure to specify
                                the -nosessionreuse parameter on the initial TLS
                                socket connection to that same host and port.

-pf filename                    Optional. A text file containing any of the socket
                                connection parameters described in this table. If this file
                                contains any other OpenEdge startup parameters, this
                                method ignores them.
-S socket-port                  The port number for the socket connection. You can
                                specify either an explicit port number or a TCP service
                                name. If you use a TCP service name, the method uses
                                the port number associated with that name in the TCP/IP
                                services file.
-ssl                            If specified, the connection to the server socket uses
                                Transport Layer Security (TLS) tunneling.
                                (Used in conjunction with the -H and -S parameters.)
                                Note: Be sure you need TLS before using this option.
                                TLS incurs more or less heavy performance penalties,
                                depending on resources and load.

-sslciphers                     Optional. A comma-separated list of cryptographic
SSL-protocol-ciphers            ciphers the client is willing to accept.
-sslprotocols                   Optional. A comma-separated list of cryptographic
SSL-protocol-names              protocols the client is willing to accept.
-sslAuthAuthentication-type Specifies if access to an OpenEdge and Non-OpenEdge
                            server requires TLS client authentication.
                                The two authentication types are:
                                1. ssl—Enables client authentication for OpenEdge
                                   and Non-OpenEdge server access.
                                2. basic— In this authentication type, the connect
                                   method ignores the client authentication for
                                   OpenEdge and Non-OpenEdge server access.


                Parameter                              Description
                -sslKeyFile filename |                 The location of the client certificate.
                target-database
                                                       If you do not specify an absolute path of the client
                                                       certificate file, the connection operation searches the
                                                       $DLC/keys folder for the
                                                       client-certificate-file-name.pem file.This
                                                       option must be set only if -sslAuth parameter is set
                                                       to ssl.

                -sslKeyPwd password                    The TLS client certificate password in clear text or in
                                                       encoded format.
                                                       For more information on encoded format, see 'Use
                                                       genpassword to obtain a keystore password-encrypted
                                                       value' in Manage OpenEdge Keys and Certificates.

                -tlssupportedgroups list               The supported groups list (key exchange algorithms) that
                                                       the client sends to the server in its Client Hello
                                                       request message. List is a colon-separated list of group
                                                       names in order of preference. For example:
                                                       -tlssupportedgroups P-521:P-384:P-256.
                                                       Note: This feature is only supported for ABL client
                                                       sockets (ABL HTTP clients).


               Note: Connections to a TLS-enabled server socket require the management of public keys on the
               client (TLS client) and private keys on the server (TLS server). For ABL sockets, the TLS client is
               the ABL session initiating the TLS connection on a socket object and the TLS server is the ABL
               session enabling TLS connections on a server socket object. For information on using TLS to secure
               an ABL socket connection, see the sections on sockets in OpenEdge Programming Interfaces. For
               more information on TLS and managing private key and digital certificate stores for OpenEdge TLS
               clients and servers, see Learn about Security and Auditing.
   If an error occurs while executing the CONNECT( ) method, the method returns FALSE. Otherwise, it returns TRUE.
   When an ABL client (that is not TLS-enabled) calls the CONNECT( ) method and immediately reads data from the
   socket using the READ( ) method, and an ABL server (that is TLS-enabled) calls the ENABLE-CONNECTIONS( )
   method and immediately writes data to the socket using the WRITE( ) method, a deadlock condition can occur. That
   is, the client is waiting for the server to send data, and the server (regardless of the Write operation) is waiting for the
   client connection to send data that starts the TLS connection.






CONNECT( ) method (Web service)
   Connects to and associates a Web service instance with the specified server handle. The current application becomes a
   client application of the connected Web service.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Server object handle

   Syntax

     CONNECT ( [ connection-parms ] )


   connection-parms

A character string containing a space-separated list of one or more connection parameters.
The following table describes each Web service connection parameter you can include in this string.
This method ignores any other strings included in this parameter.
Table 7: Web service connection parameters

Parameter                Description
-WSDL                    The location of the WSDL document. This required parameter is the URL,
wsdl-document            UNC, or local file pathname to the WSDL file that describes the Web
                         service. The document can be local or remote. The location can optionally
                         contain a user's account name and password to use when connecting to the
                         Web Server. For more information, see -WSDL parameter security options.
                         If the protocol is not part of the wsdl-document's URL, the ‘file' protocol
                         is assumed. Additionally, the ‘file' can be a relative pathname as it is relative
                         to the current working directory.

-Binding                 The local name of the binding element contained in the WSDL document.
binding-name             Used in conjunction with -SoapEndpoint. This parameter is optional
                         if the WSDL contains only one binding.
-BindingNamespace The namespace of the binding element within the WSDL document that
binding-namespace the application will use. This optional field is needed only if the local
                  binding-name is not unique.
-clientConnectTimeout The number of milliseconds to wait before timing out each connection
nMilliseconds         attempt.
-connectionLifetime The maximum number of seconds that a given connection can be reused
nSeconds            for asynchronous requests before it is destroyed. Connections whose lifetime
                    exceeds the specified value are destroyed as they become available. An
                    available connection is one that is not currently reserved to run an
                    asynchronous request.
                         The default value is 300 seconds.

-maxConnections          Maximum number of connections maintained between the client and the
num-connections          Web Server for asynchronous requests. If num connections is less than or
                         equal to 0, the application is requesting no predefined limit on the number
                         of connections. If the client application exceeds the specified number of
                         connections, the asynchronous requests are queued.
                         The default value is 0.

-nohostverify            If specified, turns off host verification for an HTTPS Web server connection.
                         Without this parameter specified, the client compares the host name specified
                         in the connection with the Common Name specified in the server certificate,
                         and raises an error if they do not match. With this parameter specified, the
                         client never raises the error. For more information, see Learn about Security
                         and Auditing.
-nosessionreuse          If specified, the connection does not reuse the TLS session ID when
                         reconnecting to the same HTTPS-enabled Web server.
-pf filename             A text file containing any of the other Web service binding parameters
                         described in this table. If this file contains any other OpenEdge startup
                         parameters, this method ignores them.

Parameter               Description
-Port port-name         The local name of the port element contained within the service element.
                        Used in conjunction with -Service. This parameter is optional if
                        -Service contains only one port.
-servername             Specifies the server name to be used during the initialization of a TLS
servername              connection. This can be used to support Server Name Indication (SNI) .
                        Note: Server Name Indication (SNI) allows the client to add the hostname
                        that it attempts to connect to during the handshake as a part of the TLS
                        negotiation. It enables the server to select the required domain name and
                        present the certificate with the correct name. It also allows the server to
                        present multiple certificates on the same IP address and TCP port number
                        and thus allows multiple secure (HTTPS) websites (or any other Service
                        over TLS) to be served off the same IP address without requiring all those
                        sites to use the same certificate.

-Service                The local name of the service element within the WSDL document that the
service-name            application will use. This field is optional. Many WSDL documents only
                        support one service and this parameter is optional if there is only one (or
                        zero) service elements defined. Used in conjunction with -Port.
-ServiceNamespace The namespace of the service element within the WSDL document that the
service-namespace application will use. Most WSDL documents only support one service and
                  this parameter is optional if there is only one service defined. This parameter
                  is used in conjunction with -Service and is ignored if -Service was
                  not specified. This parameter is optional, if the namespace is included in
                  -Service.
-SOAPEndpoint           The URL identifying the endpoint for this Web service. Used in conjunction
URL-endpoint            with -Binding. It is an error to use this parameter in conjunction with
                        -Service or -Port.
-SOAPEndpointPassword Optional password to use with the -SoapEndpointUserid. This
password              attribute is ignored if -SoapEndpointUserid is not specified.
-SOAPEndpointUserid Optional user account name to use to connect to a Web service that hosts
user-id             the Web Server application. If -SOAPEndpointUserid is specified and
                    -SOAPEndpointPassword is not, the AVM uses a blank password.
-sslAuth            Specifies if access to a SOAP service requires TLS client authentication.
Authentication-type
                    Set this to ssl to enable client authentication for SOAP access. If you set
                    this to basic, the connect method ignores client authentication for SOAP
                    access.

-sslKeyFile             The location of the client certificate.
filename |
                        If you do not specify an absolute path of the client certificate file, the
target-database
                        connection operation searches the $DLC/keys folder for the
                        client-certificate-file-name.pem file.This option must be
                        set only if -sslAuth parameter is set to ssl.

-sslKeyPwd              The TLS client certificate password in clear text or in encoded format.
password
                        For more information on encoded format, see 'Use genpassword to obtain
                        a keystore password-encrypted value' in Manage OpenEdge Keys and
                        Certificates.

            Parameter                Description
            -TargetNamespace The namespace contained in the WSDL document. This parameter can be
            targetNamespace used as a version check. The information in this parameter is compared
                             against the -TargetNamespace contained in the WSDL document. If
                             they do NOT match the CONNECT ( ) method fails.
            -WSDLAuth           Specifies if access to a WSDL file requires TLS client authentication.
            Authentication-type
                                Set this to ssl to enable client authentication for WSDL access. If you set
                                this to basic, the connect method ignores client authentication for WSDL
                                access.

            -WSDLKeyFile             The location of the client certificate.
            filename |
                                     If you do not specify an absolute path of the client certificate file, the
            target-database
                                     connection operation searches the $DLC/keys folder for the
                                     client-certificate-file-name.pem file.
                                     This option must be set only if -WSDLAuth parameter is set to ssl.

            -WSDLKeyPwd              The TLS client certificate password in clear text or encoded format.
            password
            -WSDLPassword            Optional password to use with -WSDLUserid. This attribute is ignored
            password                 if -WSDLUserid is not specified.
            -WSDLUserid              Optional user account name to use in connecting to the Web service that
            user-id                  hosts the WSDL document. If -WSDLUserid is specified and
                                     -WSDLPassword is not, the AVM uses a blank password.


           Note: Connections to an Internet-secure (HTTPS) Web service require the management of public
           keys on the client (HTTPS client) and private keys on the server (HTTPS server). For an Internet-secure
           Web service, the HTTPS server is the Web server that hosts the Web service. For information on
           configuring a Web server for HTTPS, see your Web server documentation. For more information on
           HTTPS and TLS, and on managing private key and digital certificate stores for OpenEdge TLS clients
           and servers, see Learn about Security and Auditing.

-WSDL parameter security options
The -WSDL parameter can optionally contain a user account name and password to use to connect to a Web Server.
This is the syntax for specifying the parameter using the HTTP and HTTPS protocols, respectively:

  -WSDL http://[user-id[:password]@]
    web-server-host[:web-server-port]WSDL-path



  -WSDL https://[user-id[:password]@]
    web-server-host[:web-server-port]WSDL-path


user-id
           User account name to use to connect to a Web service that hosts the WSDL document. If user-id is
           specified and password is not, the AVM uses a blank password.
password
           Password to use with the user-id. This parameter is ignored if user-id is not specified.
web-server-host

            TCP/IP host address of the Web Server that hosts the WSDL document.
web-server-port
           TCP/IP port address of the Web Server that host the WSDL document. The default port is 80 for HTTP
           and 443 for HTTPS.
WSDL-path
         URL path to the WSDL document for the Web service.
Instead of building the account name and password into the WSDL string, you can specify the account name using the
-WSDLUserid parameter and the password using the -WSDLPassword parameter. If these parameters are used and
the WSDL URL (WSDL-path) also contains a user id and password, the information on the WSDL URL is used.

Connection parameter combinations
The CONNECT( ) method is used to connect an ABL SERVER object to a specific application service. This service
can be either an AppServer or a Web service. Independent of the type of application service to which the client is
connecting, the client needs to provide the location of the service and transport information. There are two mechanisms
for providing this information when connecting to a Web service:
1. The CONNECT( ) method can identify a specific service element name and port element name from the WSDL
   document. The combination of these two element names identify the location of a set of operations that are available
   on the Web service. It also identifies the transport data. The service element name is specified with the -Service
   connection parameter and the port element name is specified with the -Port connection parameter.
    If the WSDL document contains several service elements, the CONNECT method must identify which service
    element the client wants to connect to, via -Service. If the WSDL document only identifies one service element,
    the CONNECT method does not need to contain the service element name. Similarly if the WSDL document (or if
    the identified service element) only identifies one port element, the CONNECT method does not need to contain the
    port element name.
    If the application needs to provide account name and password information, it can accomplish this by providing the
    account name and password information in the -SoapEndpointUserid and -SoapEndpointPassword
    parameters.
    If the WSDL document identifies multiple service elements with the same local name, the CONNECT ( ) method
    must also contain the -ServiceNamespace connection parameter.
2. If the WSDL document contains several binding elements, the CONNECT method must identify which binding
   element the client wants to use, via the -Binding parameter. If the WSDL document only identifies one binding
   element, the CONNECT method does not need to contain the binding element name.
    If the application needs to provide account name and password information, it can accomplish this by providing the
    account name and password information in the -SoapEndpointUserid and -SoapEndpointPassword
    parameters.
    If the WSDL document identifies multiple binding elements with the same local name, the CONNECT( ) method
    must also contain the -BindingNamespace connection parameter.

If an error occurs while executing the CONNECT( ) method, the method returns FALSE. Otherwise, it returns TRUE.
An error can occur if:
•   The server handle is invalid.
•   One of the parameters contains an invalid value.
•   One of the values specified in the connection-parms parameter is invalid.
•   The -TargetNamespace does not match the value contained in the WSDL document.
•   The WSDL document cannot be located.
•   The -WSDLUserid or -WSDLPassword is not valid.
If the CONNECT( ) method completes successfully, the CONNECTED( ) method returns TRUE.
   The connection lasts until the client application executes the server handle DISCONNECT( ) method or until the AVM
   detects any failure condition that automatically terminates the connection.






CONNECTED( ) method
   Indicates whether a Progress Application Server for OpenEdge (PAS for OpenEdge) instance, or Web service is currently
   connected and associated with the server handle, or if a socket handle is currently connected to a port.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Server object handle, Socket object handle

   Syntax

       CONNECTED ( )


   For a Web service or PAS for OpenEdge instance, this method indicates if a server handle is currently connected (that
   is, if the client has a logical connection to the Web service or PAS for OpenEdge instance). It does not indicate that a
   physical connection exists between the ABL client and the Web service or PAS for OpenEdge instance.
   For a state-reset, state-aware, or stateless application server, this method returns TRUE if the application server is
   currently connected and associated with the server handle. For a state-free application server, this method returns TRUE
   if the CONNECT( ) method has been successfully executed for an application service associated with this handle and
   at least one application server resource is available for the client to access this application service.
   This method returns TRUE between the successful invocation of the CONNECT( ) method and a call to the
   DISCONNECT( ) method. If the connection terminated abnormally (that is, other than by the DISCONNECT( )
   method), the CONNECTED( ) method returns FALSE.
   Note: This method returning TRUE does not indicate the state of the HTTP connection to the Web service or PAS for
   OpenEdge instance. If there is a failure in the connection between the client and the Web service or PAS for OpenEdge
   instance, subsequent requests might fail.
   However, in OpenEdge 12.3 and above, this method has been improved to return the availability of a valid server session
   for an ABL client. For more information, see the "Enhanced server object handle CONNECTED() method for ABL
   clients" entry in What's New in OpenEdge 12.3.
   For a socket object, this method returns TRUE if the socket handle refers to a connected socket, and returns FALSE
   otherwise.






CONTEXT-HELP attribute
   (Windows only)
   When CONTEXT-HELP is TRUE, a question mark icon displays in the title bar of the window or dialog box. The
   default value is FALSE. This attribute must be set before the window or dialog box is realized.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writable
   Applies to: DIALOG-BOX widget, WINDOW widget
   Due to bugs in Microsoft Windows, the question mark icon does not appear, or appears but does not function, when
   combined with other attribute settings that affect a window's title bar:
   •   If CONTEXT-HELP = TRUE and SMALL-TITLE = TRUE, the question mark icon does not appear.
   •   If CONTEXT-HELP = TRUE and both MIN-BUTTON = TRUE and MAX-BUTTON = TRUE, the question mark
       icon does not appear.
   •   If CONTEXT-HELP = TRUE and either (but not both) of MIN-BUTTON or MAX-BUTTON = TRUE, the question
       mark icon appears but does not function.
   •   If CONTEXT-HELP = TRUE and CONTROL-BOX = FALSE, the question mark icon does not appear.
   To summarize, you must set CONTEXT-HELP = TRUE, MIN-BUTTON = FALSE, and MAX-BUTTON = FALSE
   (leaving CONTROL-BOX at its default value of TRUE and SMALL-TITLE at its default value of FALSE) in order to
   successfully use this feature with a window widget.
   Note: The preceding settings only apply to window widgets, not to dialog boxes. The question mark icon always
   functions correctly when used with a dialog box.





CONTEXT-HELP-FILE attribute
   (Windows only)
   Specifies the path name of a help (.HLP) file associated with a dialog box, window, or session.
   Return type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writable
   Applies to: SESSION system handle, DIALOG-BOX widget, WINDOW widget
   If CONTEXT-HELP-FILE is not specified (is unknown) for a dialog box, the dialog box inherits the help file of its
   parent window. If the parent window's CONTEXT-HELP-FILE is also unknown, it inherits the session's help file
   (specified by SESSION:CONTEXT-HELP-FILE).
   The full pathname of the help file should be given. The AVM does not search for the help file. The pathname can contain
   Unicode characters. See Internationalize ABL Applications for more information about Unicode.





CONTEXT-HELP-ID attribute
   (Windows only)
   Specifies the identifier of a help topic in a help file.
   Return type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget, BUTTON widget, COMBO-BOX widget, CONTROL-FRAME widget, EDITOR widget,
   FILL-IN widget, RADIO-SET widget, SELECTION-LIST widget, SLIDER widget, TOGGLE-BOX widget





CONTROL-BOX attribute
   (Windows only)
   Indicates whether the window has a system menu box in its caption bar.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writable
   Applies to: WINDOW widget
   In character interfaces, this attribute has no effect.
   The CONTROL-BOX attribute must be set before the window is realized. The default value is TRUE.




Control-Name property
   (Windows only; Graphical interfaces only)
   The component handle to an ActiveX control that has the specified design-time name (Control-Name) and that is loaded
   into the control-frame.
   Data type: COM-HANDLE
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: CONTROL-FRAME widget, COM object
   Another way of getting a component handle to an ActiveX control is to access it through the control collection. For
   more information, see the Controls property on page 132 entry.
   References to COM object properties and methods extend the syntax used for referencing widget attributes and methods.
   For more information, see Accessing COM object properties and methods on page 33.
   To return the component handle of the ActiveX control, you provide the design-time name as a property of the
   control-frame COM object. In the following example, Spin is the name of an ActiveX control and is also used as a
   property to return the handle to that control:

     DEFINE VARIABLE hSpin            AS COM-HANDLE NO-UNDO.
     DEFINE VARIABLE hControlFrameCOM AS COM-HANDLE NO-UNDO.
     DEFINE VARIABLE hControlFrame    AS HANDLE     NO-UNDO.

     /* Instantiate the control-frame with hControlFrame and load the Spin control
        into it*/
     hControlFrameCOM = hControlFrame:COM-HANDLE.
     hSpin            = hControlFrameCOM:Spin.


   This is the simplest technique to access an ActiveX control that is loaded in a control frame.






Controls property
   (Windows only; Graphical interfaces only)
   The component handle to the control collection that references the ActiveX controls in the control-frame.
   Data type: COM-HANDLE
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: CONTROL-FRAME widget, COM object
   Because this release supports only one ActiveX control per control-frame, this control collection references only one
   control. Once you have the component handle to the control collection (collection-handle), you can get the component
   handle to the ActiveX control itself by invoking the Item( ) method of the control collection. (This is a standard ActiveX
   convention.) With support limited to a single control per control-frame, the only valid Item( ) method call is
   collection-handle:Item(1). Once you have the component handle to the actual ActiveX control, you can access the
   properties and methods of that control.
   A simpler technique for getting a component handle to an ActiveX control is to reference its name directly as a property
   of the control-frame COM object. For more information, see the Control-Name property on page 132 reference entry.
   References to COM object properties and methods extend the syntax used for referencing widget attributes and methods.
   For more information, see Accessing COM object properties and methods on page 33.






CONVERT-3D-COLORS attribute
   (Windows only)
   Determines whether image colors are converted to the corresponding system 3D colors.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writable
   Applies to: BUTTON widget, IMAGE widget
   The default value of this attribute for a button is TRUE; the default value for an image is FALSE.
   The CONVERT-3D-COLORS attribute can be set after a widget is realized, but it will not take effect until an image is
   loaded into the widget using one of the following methods: LOAD-IMAGE( ), LOAD-IMAGE-UP( ),
   LOAD-IMAGE-DOWN( ), or LOAD-IMAGE-INSENSITIVE( ).
   If the CONVERT-3D-COLORS attribute is TRUE either when the widget is realized or when any of the LOAD-IMAGE
   methods is executed, the AVM will convert the shades of gray in the image after loading it. The following table identifies
   and describes the colors that are converted.
   Table 8: 3D-color conversions

   If the color is . . .         And the original Red-Green-Blue         Then the new converted system color is . . .
                                 (RGB) color value is . . .
   White                         (255, 255, 255)                         System button highlight color
   Light Gray                    (192, 192, 192)                         System button face color
   Dark Gray                     (128, 128, 128)                         System button shadow color
   Black                         (0, 0, 0)                               System button text color






CONVERT-TO-OFFSET( ) method
   Converts a row and column value to a character offset in an editor widget.
   Return type: INTEGER
   Applies to: EDITOR widget

   Syntax

     CONVERT-TO-OFFSET ( row , column )


   row
               An integer row number.
   column
               An integer column number.
   In Windows, both the regular editor and the large editor support CONVERT-TO-OFFSET.






COPY-DATASET( ) method
   Copies a source ProDataSet object to a target ProDataSet object. By default, the AVM empties the target ProDataSet
   object temp-tables of all records before copying the source ProDataSet object.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: ProDataSet object handle
   This is the syntax to invoke this method:

   Syntax

     targ-dataset-handle:COPY-DATASET ( src-dataset-handle [ , append-mode
       [ , replace-mode[ , loose-copy-mode[ , pairs-list[ , current-only
       [ , name-prefix]]]]]] )


   targ-dataset-handle
              The handle to the target ProDataSet object to receive the copy.
   src-dataset-handle
               The handle to the source ProDataSet object from which to copy temp-table records to the target
               ProDataSet object on which you execute the method.
   append-mode
            An optional logical expression where TRUE indicates that the AVM copy the ProDataSet object
            temp-tables in an append mode.
              When TRUE, the AVM appends the source ProDataSet temp-tables to the target ProDataSet temp-tables.
              If there is a unique index on a target temp-table and the AVM finds a row with a duplicate key, it does
              not replace the row. If there is not a unique index on the target temp-table, the AVM appends the data
              row from the source temp-table to the target temp-table, which might result in duplicate rows. If this
              operation results in duplicate rows, the AVM does not generate a run-time error.
              Note: In this mode, the AVM treats duplicate temp-table rows during the copy operation in the same
              way it treats duplicate temp-table rows during a fill operation in MERGE mode.
              When you are certain the ProDataSet temp-tables do not contain duplicate rows, copying the ProDataSet
              object in append mode is more efficient than copying it in replace mode.
              When FALSE, the AVM does not append records in the target ProDataSet temp-tables. The default
              value is FALSE.
              The AVM ignores this expression when replace-mode is TRUE.
   replace-mode
             An optional logical expression where TRUE indicates that the AVM copy the ProDataSet object
             temp-tables in a replace mode.
              When TRUE, the AVM replaces records in the target ProDataSet object temp-tables with corresponding
              records from the source ProDataSet temp-tables. The target temp-table must have a unique primary
              index that the AVM can use to find the corresponding records. When a corresponding record is found
              in the target temp-table, the AVM replaces the target record with the source record. When a
              corresponding record is not found in the target temp-table, the AVM creates a new target record using
              the source record. If the before-image table associated with the target temp-table contains a row for
              the target record, the row is left in place.
              Copying ProDataSet object temp-tables in replace mode is less efficient than copying them in append
              mode. When you are certain the ProDataSet object temp-tables do not contain duplicate rows, copy
              the ProDataSet object in append mode.
             When FALSE, the AVM does not replace records in the target ProDataSet object temp-tables. The
             default value is FALSE.
loose-copy-mode
           An optional logical expression where TRUE indicates that the AVM copy the ProDataSet object
           temp-tables in a loose-copy mode. That is, it relaxes the requirement that the metaschema for the source
           and target temp-tables be the same.
             When TRUE, the AVM copies each temp-table in the source ProDataSet object to the target ProDataSet
             object based on a field mapping between the source and target temp-table buffers. If there is an attached
             data source with a field mapping, the AVM uses that field mapping to copy fields from each source
             temp-table buffer to its target temp-table buffer. If there are fields in either buffer that do not exist in
             the other, they are ignored. If there is no field mapping with the attached data source, or there is no
             attached data source, the AVM copies only those fields with the same name that appear in both the
             source and target temp-table metaschemas.
             When FALSE, the metaschema for the source and target temp-tables must be the same or the AVM
             generates a run-time error. The default value is FALSE.
pairs-list
             An optional character expression that evaluates to a comma-delimited list of the target and source
             temp-table pairs to be copied. Following is the pairs-list syntax:

               "target-table1,source-table1[,target-table2,source-table2]..."

             If specified, the AVM copies only the listed temp-tables by matching the target and source temp-table
             names.
             If not specified, the AVM copies all the temp-tables in the order they were defined or added in the
             ProDataSets. If either the source or target ProDataSet has one or more extra temp-tables at the end,
             the extra temp-tables are ignored.
current-only
             An optional logical expression where TRUE indicates that the AVM copy only the current record from
             each temp-table at each level in the source ProDataSet object to the target ProDataSet object. The
             default value is FALSE.
             Note: You might need to synchronize the buffers to ensure they are the related buffers. Once you
             have read a record into a top-level buffer, you can synchronize the related buffers by calling the
             SYNCHRONIZE( ) method.
             To copy the current record from a single temp-table, you can use the BUFFER-COPY statement or
             BUFFER-COPY( ) method.
name-prefix
          An optional character expression used as the prefix for naming the target ProDataSet. If the parameter
          is not passed, or is passed as the Unknown value (?), the AVM uses the default "cpy" prefix. If the
          parameter is passed as an empty string "", then no prefix is added and the target ProDataSet will have
          the same name as the source.
When the AVM copies the source ProDataSet object, it copies each temp-table in its entirety and in the order in which
the temp-table was defined. That is, it does not copy the temp-tables in an interleaved and nested manner based on their
data relations. If either the source or target ProDataSet has one or more extra temp-tables at the end, the extra temp-tables
are ignored.
When the AVM copies a ProDataSet object in any mode, except loose-copy mode, and the target ProDataSet object has
a metaschema (that is, temp-table and relation definitions), the source ProDataSet object metaschema must be the same.
If the source and target ProDataSet object metaschema is not the same, the AVM generates a run-time error. If the target

   ProDataSet object is a newly created dynamic object with only a handle and no metaschema, the AVM copies the source
   ProDataSet object including its metaschema.

   Note
   If the source or target (but not both) ProDataSet has any before-table records, you can use COPY-DATASET on that
   ProDataSet. However, if append mode or replace mode is specified and the target ProDataSet has any before-table
   records, the AVM generates a run-time error.

   See also
   ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE( ) method on page 62, FILL-MODE attribute on page 202, COPY-TEMP-TABLE( ) method
   on page 137





COPY-SAX-ATTRIBUTES( ) method
   Performs a deep copy of a SAX-attributes object.
   Typically, this method is used to capture the contents of the SAX-attributes object automatically created, populated, and
   destroyed by the SAX parser during the scope of a call to the startElement callback procedure. For example, to preserve
   the attributes of an XML element outside of the startElement procedure, you create a SAX-attributes object outside the
   scope of the startElement callback and use this method on the handle of the new object. The handle to the new
   SAX-attributes object could then be passed, for example, as a parameter to the START-ELEMENT( ) method of a
   SAX-writer object. In this way, you can easily program a concurrent SAX read/write routine.
   The copy deletes any previous contents of the target handle and replaces them with the contents of the source handle.
   Remember, if you explicitly create SAX-attributes objects using the CREATE SAX-ATTRIBUTES statement, you must
   explicitly delete the objects when your copying operations complete.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: SAX-attributes object handle
   This is the syntax to invoke this method:

   Syntax

     target-handle:COPY-SAX-ATTRIBUTES ( source-handle )


   target-handle
              A handle to a valid SAX-attributes object. The contents of this SAX-attributes object handle will be
              overwritten by the contents of the SAX-attributes object of the source-handle.
   source-handle
             A handle to a valid SAX-attributes object. The contents of this SAX-attributes object overwrites the
             contents of the SAX-attributes object on which you call this method.
   The following is an example:

     hWrite-SAX-attributes:COPY-SAX-ATTRIBUTES( hRead-SAX-attributes ).





COPY-TEMP-TABLE( ) method
   Copies a source temp-table object to a target temp-table object. Either of the temp-tables (source or target) may be a
   member of a ProDataSet object. The AVM empties the target temp-table of all records before copying the source
   temp-table, by default.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Temp-table object handle, Buffer object handle

   Syntax

     targ-tt-handle:COPY-TEMP-TABLE ( src-tt-handle [ , append-mode
       [ , replace-mode [ , loose-copy-mode [ , name prefix]]]] )


   targ-tt-handle
              The handle to the target temp-table object to receive the copy.
   src-tt-handle
               The handle to the source temp-table object from which to copy records to the temp-table object on
               which you call this method.
   append-mode
            An optional logical expression where TRUE indicates that the AVM copy the temp-table object in an
            append mode.
              When TRUE, the AVM appends the source temp-table object to the target temp-table object. If there
              is a unique index on the target temp-table and the AVM finds a row with a duplicate key, it does not
              replace the row. If there is not a unique index on the target temp-table, the AVM appends the data row
              from the source temp-table to the target temp-table, which might result in duplicate rows. If this
              operation results in duplicate rows, the AVM does not generate a run-time error.
              Note: In this mode, the AVM treats duplicate temp-table rows during the copy operation in the same
              way it treats duplicate temp-table rows during a fill operation in MERGE mode.
              When you are certain a temp-table object does not contain duplicate rows, copying the object in append
              mode is more efficient than copying it in replace mode.
              When FALSE, the AVM does not append records in the target temp-table object. The default value
              is FALSE.
              The AVM ignores this expression when replace-mode is TRUE.
   replace-mode
             An optional logical expression where TRUE indicates that the AVM copy the temp-table object in a
             replace mode.
              When TRUE, the AVM replaces records in the target temp-table object with corresponding records
              from the source temp-table object. The target temp-table must have a unique primary index that the
              AVM can use to find the corresponding record. When the corresponding record is found in the target
              temp-table, the AVM replaces the target record with the source record. When the corresponding record
              is not found in the target temp-table, the AVM creates a new target record using the source record. If
              the before-image table associated with the target temp-table contains a row for the target record, the
              row is left in place.
              Copying a temp-table object in replace mode is less efficient than copying it in append mode. When
              you are certain a temp-table object does not contain duplicate rows, copy the object in append mode.
              When FALSE, the AVM does not replace records in the target temp-table object. The default value
              is FALSE.

   loose-copy-mode
              An optional logical expression where TRUE indicates that the AVM copy the temp-table object in a
              loose-copy mode. That is, it relaxes the requirement that the metaschema for the source and target
              temp-tables be the same.
              When TRUE, the AVM copies the source temp-table object to the target temp-table object based on
              a field mapping between the source and target temp-table buffers. If there is an attached data source
              with a field mapping, the AVM uses that field mapping to copy fields from the source temp-table
              buffer to its target temp-table buffer. If there are fields in either buffer that do not exist in the other,
              they are ignored. If there is no field mapping with the attached data source, or there is no attached data
              source, the AVM copies only those fields with the same name that appear in both the source and target
              temp-table metaschema.
              When FALSE, the metaschema for the source and target temp-tables must be the same or the AVM
              generates a run-time error. The default value is FALSE.
   name-prefix
             An optional character expression used as the prefix for naming the target temp-table. If the parameter
             is not passed, or is passed as the Unknown value (?), the AVM uses the default "cpy" prefix. If the
             parameter is passed as an empty string "", then no prefix is added and the target temp-table will have
             the same name as the source.
   If the source temp-table object has a before-image table that contains changed row data, the AVM generates a run-time
   error.
   When the AVM copies a temp-table object in any mode, except loose-copy mode, and the target temp-table object is in
   a PREPARED state (that is, it has a metaschema), the source temp-table object metaschema must be the same. Each
   column in the source temp-table must match the target temp-table in position, data type, and extent. If the source
   temp-table object metaschema is not the same, the AVM generates a run-time error. If the target temp-table object is
   not in a PREPARED state (that is, it has no metaschema), the AVM copies the source temp-table object including its
   metaschema.
   If the target temp-table object is a member of a ProDataSet object, the AVM does not track changes to the data in that
   temp-table (it ignores the TRACKING-CHANGES attribute setting during the copy operation).

   Note
   If the source or target (but not both) temp-table has any before-table records, you can use COPY-TEMP-TABLE on
   that temp-table. However, if append mode or replace mode is specified and the target temp-table has any before-table
   records, the AVM generates a run-time error.

   See also
   FILL-MODE attribute on page 202, COPY-DATASET( ) method on page 134






COVERAGE attribute
   Determines whether or not the profiler records information that can be used for coverage analysis. The default is FALSE.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writable
   Applies to: PROFILER system handle
   If set to TRUE, the profiler records statement and internal procedure information for each external .p procedure that
   is executed. If set to FALSE, then this level of information is not collected. Combined with the timing data that tells
   which statements were executed, can be used to perform ABL application code coverage analysis. For example, collecting
   coverage information could show that during testing only 30 percent of the code was executed.

   Note: The profiler records the information for coverage analysis only the first time an external .p procedure is executed.
   If the PROFILER:COVERAGE attribute is FALSE, then the first time a procedure is executed the coverage analysis
   information is not registered, even if it is set to TRUE at a later time.






CPCASE attribute
   The case table the AVM uses to establish case rules for the Internal Code Page (-cpinternal) startup parameter.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   This attribute reads the value you set using the Case Table (-cpcase) startup parameter.






CPCOLL attribute
   The collation table the AVM uses with the Internal Code Page (-cpinternal) startup parameter.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   By default, the AVM uses the collation rules you specify to compare characters and sort records. The collation rules
   specified with the Collation Table (-cpcoll) startup parameter take precedence over a collation specified for any
   database the AVM accesses during the session, except when the AVM uses or modifies pre-existing indexes. If you do
   not specify a collation with the -cpcoll startup parameter, the AVM uses the language collation rules defined for the
   first database on the command line. If you do not specify a database on the command line, the AVM uses the collation
   rules with the default name "basic" (which might or might not exist in the convmap.cp file).






CPINTERNAL attribute
   The internal code page the AVM uses in memory.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   This attribute reads the value you set using the Internal Code Page (-cpinternal) startup parameter.






CPLOG attribute
   The code page for all messages written to the log (.lg) file.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   This attribute reads the value you set using the Log File Code Page (-cplog) startup parameter.





CPPRINT attribute
   The code page the AVM uses for the OUTPUT TO PRINTER statement.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   This attribute reads the value you set using the Printer Code Page (-cpprint) startup parameter.





CPRCODEIN attribute
   The code page the AVM uses to convert text strings into the text segment.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   This attribute reads the value you set using the R-code In Code Page (-cprcodein) startup parameter.






CPRCODEOUT attribute
   The code page ABL uses at compile time to convert text strings into the text segment and marks the text segment with
   the code page name.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   This attribute reads the value you set using the R-code Out Code Page (-cprcodeout) startup parameter.






CPSTREAM attribute
   The code page the AVM uses for stream I/O.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   This attribute reads the value you set using the Stream Code Page (-cpstream) startup parameter.






CPTERM attribute
   The code page the AVM uses for I/O with character terminals.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   This attribute reads the value you set using the Terminal Code Page (-cpterm) startup parameter.






CRC-VALUE attribute
   The cyclic redundancy check (CRC) value for either an r-code file, or a database table corresponding to a buffer object.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle, RCODE-INFO handle
   When applied to the RCODE-INFO system handle, the r-code CRC is calculated during compilation and stored in the
   r-code file using the contents of the source files, including included files.
   When applied to the Buffer object handle, the database CRC is calculated using the metaschema _CRC field value from
   the _File record for the database record corresponding to the buffer object's table (which can be a standard or temp-table).
   The CRC for a temp-table is calculated differently than for a standard table. Some differences include:
   •   Standard tables have a _File record in the database that contains a _CRC field for the CRC value, which is calculated
       as you make changes to the table. Temp-tables do not have a _File record, and do not exist in a database.
   •   The CRC values for both standard and temp-tables include the data type, extent and position of each column in the
       table, as well as index information. However, the CRC value for a standard table includes additional information
       that a CRC value for a temp-table does not (such as, the _Order field in the _File record).
   •   The CRC value for a standard table is stored in a .r file. The AVM uses that CRC value at run time to verify the
       integrity of application r-code that uses the table. The AVM uses the CRC value for a temp-table to compare table
       parameters between a calling and called procedure (to avoid a field-by-field comparison).
   For more information on CRCs, see Manage ABL Applications.






CREATE-LIKE( ) method
   Creates a table like another existing table, or a dynamic ProDataSet object like another static or dynamic ProDataSet
   object.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: ProDataSet object handle, Temp-table object handle

   Syntax

       CREATE-LIKE ( { src-buffer-handle-exp | src-table-handle-exp |
       src-table-name-exp }
         [ , src-index-name-exp ] )



       CREATE-LIKE ( { src-dataset-handle | src-dataset-name }
         [ , name-prefix ] )


   src-buffer-handle-exp
               An expression that evaluates to a buffer handle from which to copy the field definitions, and optionally,
               the indexes if src-index-name-exp is not specified. This can be a buffer for either a temp-table or
               database.
   src-table-handle-exp
               An expression that evaluates to a temp-table handle from which to copy the field definitions, and
               optionally, the indexes if src-index-name-exp is not specified.
   src-table-name-exp

               An expression that evaluates to the name of a temp-table or database table from which to copy the
               field definitions and, optionally, the indexes if src-index-name-exp is not specified.
   src-index-name-exp
              A character expression giving an index to be copied from the source table. If this option is specified,
              only this single index is copied from the source table.
   src-dataset-handle
               The handle to the ProDataSet object from which to create the new ProDataSet object.
   src-dataset-name
               The name of the ProDataSet object from which to create the new ProDataSet object.
   name-prefix
             A character expression to prepend to each of the source ProDataSet member buffer names, which
             creates a new name for each new member buffer.
   For a table handle, this method copies the field definitions from the specified source table and establishes the default or
   specified source indexes. You cannot call this method after another definitional method is called unless you call CLEAR()
   first.
   For a ProDataSet object handle, this method creates a dynamic ProDataSet object like another static or dynamic ProDataSet
   object. The AVM creates the new ProDataSet object with the same name, temp-table definitions, and relation definitions.
   The AVM also creates the same before-image and after-image tables, if any exist for the source object. No data from
   the source temp-tables is copied. The AVM also lets you rename the newly created ProDataSet member buffers by
   prepending a prefix to the source buffer names.
   Note: For a ProDataSet object handle, if you call CLEAR() or CREATE-LIKE() more than once on a dataset, the
   dynamic temp-tables from the prior call(s) are not deleted automatically and have the potential to cause a memory leak.
   Therefore the application is responsible for deleting the temp-tables if CLEAR() or CREATE-LIKE() are called again.

   See also
   CREATE-LIKE-SEQUENTIAL( ) method on page 142







CREATE-LIKE-SEQUENTIAL( ) method
   Creates a table like another existing database table or temp-table. Unlike CREATE-LIKE( ), which creates temp-table
   fields in metaschema _field._field-rpos order (POSITION order in the .df schema definition file) of the source table's
   fields, this method creates fields in _field._order sequence.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Temp-table object handle
   You can guarantee agreement of temp-table field order between any client and any application server using
   CREATE-LIKE-SEQUENTIAL( ), as long as the _field._order values are the same.
   CREATE-LIKE-SEQUENTIAL( ) uses the field order as defined in the Data Dictionary when the source is a database
   table.

   Syntax

     CREATE-LIKE-SEQUENTIAL ( { src-buffer-handle-exp | src-table-handle-exp |
     src-table-name-exp }
       [ , src-index-name-exp ] )


   src-buffer-handle-exp

               An expression that evaluates to a buffer handle from which to copy the field definitions, and optionally,
               the indexes if src-index-name-exp is not specified. This can be a buffer for either a temp-table or
               database.
   src-table-handle-exp
               An expression that evaluates to a temp-table handle from which to copy the field definitions, and
               optionally, the indexes if src-index-name-exp is not specified.
   src-table-name-exp
               An expression that evaluates to the name of a temp-table or database table from which to copy the
               field definitions and, optionally, the indexes if src-index-name-exp is not specified.
   src-index-name-exp
              A character expression giving an index to be copied from the source table. If this option is specified,
              only this single index is copied from the source table.
   This method copies the field definitions from the specified source table and establishes the default or specified source
   indexes. You cannot call this method after another definitional method is called unless you call CLEAR( ) first.
   Note: The original behavior of CREATE-LIKE( ) was used to support RAW-TRANSFER with temp-tables. If you
   are using RAW-TRANSFER between a database table and a temp-table defined like the database table, then you should
   not use CREATE-LIKE-SEQUENTIAL( ).

   See also
   CREATE-LIKE( ) method on page 141






CREATE-NODE( ) method
   Create an XML node in the current document. The first parameter must be a valid X-noderef handle and will refer to
   the new XML node if the method succeeds. This method merely creates the XML node as part of the XML document.
   The INSERT-BEFORE or APPEND-CHILD methods are required to actually insert it into the document's tree.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: X-document object handle

   Syntax

     CREATE-NODE ( x-node-handle , name , type )


   x-node-handle
             A valid X-noderef handle to use for the new XML node.
   name
               A character expression representing the NAME of the node. The relationship between the node NAME
               and SUBTYPE attributes is shown in the following table.
   type
               A character expression representing the node's SUBTYPE, which will be one of: ATTRIBUTE,
               CDATA-SECTION, COMMENT, DOCUMENT-FRAGMENT, ELEMENT, ENTITY-REFERENCE,
               PROCESSING-INSTRUCTION, TEXT.
   Table 9: Relationship between the SUBTYPE and NAME attributes

   If the SUBTYPE is . . .                          then the NAME attribute is . . .
   ATTRIBUTE                                        The name of the attribute

   If the SUBTYPE is . . .                         then the NAME attribute is . . .
   CDATA-SECTION                                   A constant value; the name parameter is ignored
   COMMENT
   DOCUMENT-FRAGMENT
   TEXT

   ELEMENT                                         The name of the XML tag, with any namespace prefix included
   ENTITY-REFERENCE                                The name of the entity referenced without leading ampersand and
                                                   trailing semicolon
   PROCESSING-INSTRUCTION                          The target; the first token following the <? markup


  The following example demonstrates creating a node in a document. If hDoc is an X-document handle, and hNoderef
  and hNoderefChild are X-noderefs, this is how you would add hNoderefChild to hNoderef in the document associated
  with hDoc:

    /* Assume hNoderef has previously been added to the tree. Create an ABL handle
       that can refer to a node in an XML parse tree.*/
    CREATE X-NODEREF hNoderefChild.

    /* Create an XML node whose name is "Address" & whose type is "ELEMENT" */
    hDoc:CREATE-NODE(hNoderefChild, "Address", "ELEMENT")

    /* Put this child into the tree and ultimately into the document. */
    hNoderef:APPEND-CHILD(hNoderefChild).







CREATE-NODE-NAMESPACE( ) method
  Creates a namespace-aware XML node whose name can be either a single string y or an x:y combination.
  Note: To ensure consistency across all nodes in an XML document, use either the CREATE-NODE-NAMESPACE( )
  method or the CREATE-NODE( ) method to build an XML document; do not use both methods within a single document.
  Return type: LOGICAL
  Applies to: X-document object handle

  Syntax

    CREATE-NODE-NAMESPACE
      ( x-node-handle , namespace-uri , qualified-name , type )


  x-node-handle
            A valid X-noderef handle to use for the new namespace-aware XML node.
  namespace-uri
           A character expression representing the namespace Uniform Resource Identifier (URI). The
           namespace-uri must be unique and persistent. Although the namespace-uri may be an HTTP URL,
           there is no guarantee that it points to a retrievable resource. It is only a name and care should be taken
           if you use this name for other purposes.
              If the character expression evaluates to either the empty string ("") or the Unknown value (?), no
              namespace is associated with the element.
   qualified-name
              A character expression representing the name of the node, optionally qualified with a prefix including
              a colon (for example, prefix:node-name). Unless you are using a default namespace, a prefix is required
              and should be set to the prefix specified when you declared the namespace using the xmlns attribute.
   type
              A character expression representing the node's SUBTYPE, which will be either ELEMENT or
              ATTRIBUTE.
   The following code fragment illustrates how to create a namespace-aware node in an XML document using either a
   specific namespace or the default namespace:

     . . .
     /* Look for a colonized name in rootNodeName. */
     found = INDEX(rootNodeName, ":").
     IF found > 0 THEN DO:
       /* Namespace declarations are special kinds of attributes that belong in
           the http://www.w3.org/2000/xmlns/ namespace.*/

      errStat = hDocument:CREATE-NODE-NAMESPACE(hNsDecl,
       "http://www.w3.org/2000/xmlns/", "xmlns:" +
       SUBSTRING(rootNodeName, 1, found - 1), "attribute").
     END.

     ELSE DO:
      /* Use the default namespace, which does not need a namespace declaration
          prefix, and assign it to the http://www.w3.org/2000/xmlns/ namespace.*/


      errStat = hDocument:CREATE-NODE-NAMESPACE(hNsDecl,
       "http://www.w3.org/2000/xmlns/", "xmlns", "attribute").
     END.

     IF NOT errStat THEN LEAVE.

     /* Set the value of the namespace attribute to the namespace URI. */
     hNsDecl:NODE-VALUE = namespaceURI.
     . . .






CREATE-RESULT-LIST-ENTRY( ) method
   Creates an entry in the result list for the current row. Use the CREATE-RESULT-LIST-ENTRY method in conjunction
   with new browse rows or new query rows to synchronize the data with the query.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: BROWSE widget, Query object handle

   Syntax

     CREATE-RESULT-LIST-ENTRY ( )
   For browses, this method should be used with a ROW-LEAVE trigger when the NEW-ROW attribute is TRUE. For example,
   if the user adds a row to an updateable browse, you can use this method to create an entry for the new row in the result
   list.
   For a Query object handle, the current position of the query is used to insert the new result entry. Depending on the
   position, the new entry is added:
   •   after the current row
   •   as the first row if the query is opened but not yet positioned
   •   as the last row when the query is OFF-END
   To ensure that the query and buffers are positioned correctly, you can do a FIND on them. The buffers need to be the
   actual buffers used in the query and not a different buffer on the same table.
   Note: The CREATE-RESULT-LIST-ENTRY() method cannot be used together with other assignments in a single
   ASSIGN statement.






CURRENT-CHANGED attribute
   Indicates whether a record in a buffer is different following a FIND CURRENT or GET CURRENT statement or method.
   If the record is different, CURRENT-CHANGED is TRUE. Otherwise, CURRENT-CHANGED is FALSE.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle
   Note: The CURRENT-CHANGED attribute corresponds to the CURRENT-CHANGED function.






CURRENT-COLUMN attribute
   The value of the browse column that contains the current cell. This attribute moves focus to the cell in the specified
   column in the current row.
   Data type: HANDLE
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget
   For the browse, if the browse or a browse component currently has focus, then setting the attribute to another column
   causes the proper LEAVE and cell ENTRY events to happen.
   If the setting of the CURRENT-COLUMN attribute happens when focus is outside of the browse, then the browse's
   internal handle to the current column is updated so that it will become the current column when you tab back into the
   browse. Also if you apply "START-SEARCH" the search mode will now use this column to search on.






CURRENT-ENVIRONMENT attribute
   Returns a list of CGI environment variable settings and HTTP header information, and is used by the get-cgi WebSpeed
   API function. Intended for internal use only.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: WEB-CONTEXT system handle
   




CURRENT-ITERATION attribute (Data Objects)
   Indicates which iteration level corresponds to the buffer handle during a recursive FILL of a ProDataSet.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle
   As a recursive ProDataSet FILL is proceeding, it creates clones of the relevant buffers, relations, queries and data-sources
   for each level of recursion. As a new record is added to the ProDataSet, it fires FILL events on the recursed, cloned
   buffer. From inside the event handler, you may want to see previous iterations of the buffer; its parent, grandparent,
   great-grandparent, and so on. CURRENT-ITERATION returns the level of iteration for the cloned buffer handle. To
   refer to the cloned buffer handle, use SELF:CURRENT-ITERATION from within the BEFORE-ROW-FILL and
   AFTER-ROW-FILL event handlers.
   If the buffer object handle does not point to a ProDataSet temp-table or is not part of a recursive data-relation,
   CURRENT-ITERATION returns the Unknown value (?).

   See also
   DEFINE DATASET statement, FILL( ) method on page 201, GET-ITERATION( ) method (Data Objects) on page 235,
   NUM-ITERATIONS attribute (data objects) on page 353, RECURSIVE attribute on page 395






CURRENT-ITERATION attribute (Widget Objects)
   A handle for the current iteration of the frame or dialog box.
   Data type: HANDLE
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: DIALOG-BOX widget, FRAME widget
   This attribute is a read-only attribute for dialog boxes.






CURRENT-QUERY( ) method
   The handle to the ProDataSet query that contains the currently selected row in the ProBindingSource. This method
   enables access to the correct child query when a bound .NET grid edits, creates, or deletes a row from a child table.
   Use this method when the .NET control is bound to a ProDataSet object that contains child buffers.
   Data type: HANDLE
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Data-relation object handle

   Syntax

     CURRENT-QUERY ( [band-index] )


   band-index
                An optional integer value that specifies the band index in a hierarchical grid. The band index is a
                0-based index. Use this parameter only with recursive data-relations. If you specify this parameter for
                a non-recursive data-relation, the AVM raises an error.

When a .NET control binds to a ProBindingSource that uses a ProDataSet as its data source object, multiple relations
for the same parent-child relationship might be presented to the user simultaneously. When the user first expands a
parent row in the bound .NET control, the ProBindingSource creates a new child query and displays all child rows for
that parent row. The ProBindingSource uses the ProDataSet object's data-relation query to create and maintain this
unique query for all child rows related to the expanded parent row.
Note: You cannot set this query handle or modify the query.
The following code fragment shows an event handler. The event handler accepts information from a bound UltraWinGrid
displaying Order and Orderline data through the grid's extended version of the .NET System.EventArgs class.
From that information, the event handler can find the correct query for the currently selected record.

  DEFINE VARIABLE hDataSet AS HANDLE NO-UNDO.

  ...

  PROCEDURE BeforeRowUpdate:
    DEFINE INPUT PARAMETER sender AS System.Object         NO-UNDO.
    DEFINE INPUT PARAMETER args   AS
      Infragistics.Win.UltraWinGrid.CancelableRowEventArgs NO-UNDO.

     DEFINE VARIABLE cBufferName AS CHARACTER NO-UNDO.
     DEFINE VARIABLE hRelation   AS HANDLE    NO-UNDO.
     DEFINE VARIABLE hQuery      AS HANDLE    NO-UNDO.

    cBufferName = args:Row:Band:Key.
    IF cBufferName EQ "ttOrder" THEN
      ASSIGN
         hRelation = hDataSet:GET-RELATION(1)
         hQuery    = hRelation:CURRENT-QUERY.
    END.
    ELSE IF cBufferName EQ "ttOrderLine" THEN
      ASSIGN
         hRelation = hDataSet:GET-RELATION(2)
         hQuery    = hRelation:CURRENT-QUERY.
    END.
  END PROCEDURE.


When a ProBindingSource is attached to a ProDataSet with a recursive data-relation, the code above does not work
because a single buffer is associated with multiple BandIndexes in a hierarchical grid. The event handler must specify
the BandIndex of the current row to determine the correct query.
The following example shows a similar event handler using the optional parameter. Because an employee might also
be a manager and have employees of his own, dsRecursive has a recursive data-relation between EmpName and Manager.

   For the top band of the hierarchy, the event handler can use the TOP-NAV-QUERY. For lower bands, it needs the
   optional parameter to determine the correct query.

     DEFINE TEMP-TABLE ttEmp NO-UNDO
       BEFORE-TABLE ttEmpB
       FIELD EmpName    AS CHARACTER
       FIELD Manager    AS CHARACTER
       FIELD HireDate   AS INTEGER
       INDEX idxEmpName AS UNIQUE EmpName.

     DEFINE DATASET dsRecursive FOR ttEmp
       DATA-RELATION r1 FOR ttemp, ttemp
       RELATION-FIELDS(EmpName,Manager) RECURSIVE.

     DEFINE VARIABLE hRelation AS HANDLE NO-UNDO.
     DEFINE VARIABLE hTopQuery AS HANDLE NO-UNDO.

     ...

     PROCEDURE BeforeRowUpdate:
       DEFINE INPUT PARAMETER sender AS System.Object                                    NO-UNDO.
       DEFINE INPUT PARAMETER args   AS
         Infragistics.Win.UltraWinGrid.CancelableRowEventArgs                            NO-UNDO.
       DEFINE VARIABLE bandIndex     AS INTEGER                                          NO-UNDO.
       DEFINE VARIABLE hQuery        AS HANDLE                                           NO-UNDO.

        ASSIGN
          bandIndex = args:Row:Band:Index
          hRelation = DATASET dsRecursive:GET-RELATION(1).

       IF bandIndex EQ 0 THEN
         hQuery = hTopQuery.
       ELSE IF bandIndex > 0 THEN
         hQuery = hRelation:CURRENT-QUERY(bandIndex).
     END PROCEDURE.



   See also
   BandIndex property





CURRENT-REQUEST-INFO attribute
   An object reference to a Progress.Lang.OERequestInfo class that provides information about the current client
   request sent to and executing on an application server session.
   Note: When using the Progress Application Server (PAS) for OpenEdge, this attribute is valid on both the client and
   server sides.
   Data type: Progress.Lang.OERequestInfo class
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: SESSION system handle

   The following application server code fragment retrieves the client context identifier (CCID) that has been sent with a
   current request from an application server client:

     DEFINE VARIABLE ccid AS CHARACTER NO-UNDO.
     ASSIGN
       ccid = SESSION:CURRENT-REQUEST-INFO:ClientContextId.


   The bold code in the following fragment assigns a copy of the client principal in the current session:

     DEFINE VARIABLE hCPIn                AS HANDLE.
     DEFINE VARIABLE hCPOut               AS HANDLE.

     hCPIn = SESSION:CURRENT-REQUEST-INFO:GetClientPrincipal().
     SECURITY-POLICY:SET-CLIENT(hCPIn).
     hCPOut = SECURITY-POLICY:GET-CLIENT().
     SESSION:CURRENT-RESPONSE-INFO:SetClientPrincipal(hCPOut).

   See also
   GetClientPrincipal( ) method (Progress.Lang.OERequestInfo), CURRENT-RESPONSE-INFO attribute on page 150,
   LOCAL-VERSION-INFO attribute on page 310, REQUEST-INFO attribute on page 409, RESPONSE-INFO attribute
   on page 412, SetClientPrincipal( ) method






CURRENT-RESPONSE-INFO attribute
   An object reference to a Progress.Lang.OERequestInfo class that allows you to set the response to a current
   request that an application server session returns to a client.
   Note: When using the Progress Application Server (PAS) for OpenEdge, this attribute is valid on both the client and
   server sides.
   Data type: Progress.Lang.OERequestInfo class
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   The following application server code fragment generates a unique value as a client context identifier (CCID) and assigns
   it as the value returned to an application server client in response to the current request:

     DEFINE VARIABLE ccid AS CHARACTER NO-UNDO.
     ccid = SUBSTRING(BASE64-ENCODE (GENERATE-UUID), 1, 22).
     ASSIGN
       SESSION:CURRENT-RESPONSE-INFO:ClientContextId = ccid.


   The bold code in the following fragment sets the client principal returned to an application server client:

     DEFINE VARIABLE hCPIn                AS HANDLE.
     DEFINE VARIABLE hCPOut               AS HANDLE.

     hCPIn = SESSION:CURRENT-REQUEST-INFO:GetClientPrincipal().
     SECURITY-POLICY:SET-CLIENT(hCPIn).
     hCPOut = SECURITY-POLICY:GET-CLIENT().
     SESSION:CURRENT-RESPONSE-INFO:SetClientPrincipal(hCPOut).

   See also
   GetClientPrincipal( ) method (Progress.Lang.OERequestInfo), CURRENT-REQUEST-INFO attribute on page 149,
   LOCAL-VERSION-INFO attribute on page 310, REQUEST-INFO attribute on page 409, RESPONSE-INFO attribute
   on page 412, SetClientPrincipal( ) method






CURRENT-RESULT-ROW attribute
   The sequence number of the current row of a dynamic query's result list.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Query object handle
   Note: The CURRENT-RESULT-ROW attribute corresponds to the CURRENT-RESULT-ROW function.

   See also
   CURRENT-RESULT-ROW function






CURRENT-ROW-MODIFIED attribute
   Indicates whether any cells in the current row have been changed.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: BROWSE widget
   The CURRENT-ROW-MODIFIED attribute is set to TRUE if the user has modified any cell within the current row
   since focus moved to that row.






CURRENT-WINDOW attribute
   A current window for the specified procedure.
   Data type: HANDLE
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Procedure object handle, SOURCE-PROCEDURE system handle, TARGET-PROCEDURE system handle,
   THIS-PROCEDURE system handle
   Specifies and allows you to reset the current window used to parent alert box, dialog box, or frame widgets for the
   specified procedure. The default value is the Unknown value (?). Returns the Unknown value (?) for a Web service
   procedure or proxy procedure.
   If you set this attribute to the handle of a window, this value takes precedence over the CURRENT-WINDOW handle
   to provide the default window for parenting alert boxes, frames, and dialog boxes created within the procedure.
   This attribute is especially useful for creating and associating a unique current window with each instantiation of a
   persistent procedure. For more information on persistent procedures, see the RUN statement reference entry.






CURSOR-CHAR attribute
   The current character position of the text cursor on the current text line in an editor widget.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: EDITOR widget
   Assigning a value to CURSOR-CHAR moves the text cursor to the specified character position on the current text line.
   If the editor widget is not already realized, the AVM realizes the widget when you query the CURSOR-CHAR attribute.






CURSOR-LINE attribute
   The line within an editor widget where the text cursor is positioned.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: EDITOR widget
   Assigning a value to CURSOR-LINE moves the text cursor to the specified line. If the editor widget is not already
   realized, the AVM realizes the widget when you query the CURSOR-LINE attribute.






CURSOR-OFFSET attribute
   The character offset of the cursor within a widget.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (cell), EDITOR widget, FILL-IN widget
   Assigning a value to CURSOR-OFFSET moves the text cursor to the specified character offset. If the editor widget is
   not already realized, the AVM realizes the widget when you query the CURSOR-OFFSET attribute.
   In Windows, both the regular editor and the large editor support CURSOR-OFFSET.
   For browses, this attribute applies only to fill-in and combo-box browse columns.
   For browse columns, CURSOR-OFFSET specifies the character offset of the cursor within a browse-cell of the browse
   column.






DATA-ENTRY-RETURN attribute
   The behavior of the RETURN key for the fill-in widgets of a frame.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   If TRUE, the RETURN key in a fill-in acts like a TAB, and if the fill-in is the last widget in the tab order of its parent
   frame and of all ancestor frames, the RETURN key applies a GO event to the frame. This GO event, from a fill-in
   RETURN, propagates to all ancestor frames and their descendants, including siblings of the current frame and their
   descendants, all in the same frame family. If a widget is not a fill-in, the window system handles RETURN entries.
   The default value is TRUE for character interfaces and FALSE for graphical interfaces. The AVM ignores this attribute
   if there is a default button on the frame.






DATA-SOURCE attribute
   Returns the handle to the data-source object currently attached to the ProDataSet object buffer.
   Data type: HANDLE
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle






DATA-SOURCE-COMPLETE-MAP attribute
   Returns a comma-delimited list of field name pairs for all fields in a ProDataSet temp-table buffer that are mapped to
   corresponding fields in an attached data-source object.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle
   This list is formatted as a comma-delimited list of field name pairs, qualified with the corresponding ProDataSet temp-table
   and data-source object names, using the following syntax:

   Syntax

     tt-buffer-name.tt-field-name,db-table-name.db-field-name
     [ , tt-buffer-name.tt-field-name,db-table-name.db-field-name                                     ] ...

   Note: You may use a subscript reference for array fields mapped explicitly through subscripts.
   If the ProDataSet temp-table buffer does not have an attached data-source object, this attributes returns the Unknown
   value (?).
   Use the ATTACHED-PAIRLIST attribute on page 63 to get a list of only the field name pairs you specified with the
   most recently attached data-source object.






DATA-SOURCE-MODIFIED attribute
   Indicates that data in the data source associated with a ProDataSet temp-table buffer has been modified.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Buffer object handle, ProDataSet object handle, Temp-table object handle
   The DATA-SOURCE-MODIFIED attribute corresponds to the DATA-SOURCE-MODIFIED function.
   The AVM sets this attribute from the SAVE-ROW-CHANGES( ) method. You can also set this attribute, if needed.
   This attribute is marshalled between the client and the application server.






DATA-SOURCE-ROWID attribute
   Identifies the data-source row corresponding to the buffer object handle.
   Data type: ROWID
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Buffer object handle
   This attribute locates the data-source row corresponding to either an after-table buffer or a before-table buffer. The
   portion of the SAVE-ROW-CHANGES( ) method that locates the appropriate data-source row is used to produce a
   ROWID for users who want to either make their own version of SAVE-ROW-CHANGES( ) or access the source record
   in some way before or after SAVE-ROW-CHANGES( ).

   Syntax

     DATA-SOURCE-ROWID ( {join-level | buffer-name} )


   join-level
                An integer expression that evaluates to the level of join, if the data-source is a join.
   buffer-name
             A character expression that evaluates to the name of one of the data-source buffers.

   See also
   AFTER-TABLE attribute on page 57, BEFORE-TABLE attribute on page 72, SAVE-ROW-CHANGES( ) method on
   page 422







DATA-TYPE attribute
   A character value that represents the data type of the field associated with the widget. For example, the DATA-TYPE
   attribute of a slider widget always returns the value "INTEGER" because slider widgets can only represent integer values.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (column), Buffer-field object handle, COMBO-BOX widget, EDITOR widget, FILL-IN
   widget, RADIO-SET widget, RECTANGLE widget, SELECTION-LIST widget, SLIDER widget, TEXT widget,
   TOGGLE-BOX widget
   This attribute is writeable for combo-boxes (only before realization), fill-ins, and text widgets only. For combo-boxes,
   writing to this attribute makes the drop-down list empty.
   You must define this attribute as "CHARACTER" for SIMPLE and DROP-DOWN combo-boxes.
   For widgets like image or rectangle, where a data type has no meaning, the attribute returns "UNKNOWN".
   The DATA-TYPE attribute is only writable for dynamic fill-ins before they are realized. This attribute is read only for
   static fill-ins.






DATASET attribute
   Returns the handle for the ProDataSet object of which the buffer is a member. Use this handle to access the attributes
   and methods of the associated ProDataSet object.
   Data type: HANDLE
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer object handle





DATE-FORMAT attribute
   The format used to represent dates during the current ABL session (for the DATE, DATETIME, and DATETIME-TZ
   data types).
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   Typical values are "mdy" or "dmy". This attribute provides the same functionality as the Date Format (-d) parameter.






DB-CONTEXT attribute
   Returns the logical database to which the DSLOG-MANAGER system handle currently applies. Valid values are any
   valid, connected logical name or alias for a database of a supported database type. The default value is the Unknown
   value (?). If you set DB-CONTEXT to an alias, it returns the logical name of the database currently assigned to that
   alias.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: DSLOG-MANAGER system handle
   Each DataServer connection is a separate entity for which you can specify different logging settings. You use this
   attribute at run time to specify the DataServer connection with which you are working. You must set DB-CONTEXT
   before accessing any other attribute or method of the DSLOG-MANAGER system handle.
   If you set DB-CONTEXT to the Unknown value (?), you cannot access DSLOG-MANAGER until you reset
   DB-CONTEXT to a valid logical database name or alias. When the database specified in DB-CONTEXT is disconnected,
   the client automatically sets DB-CONTEXT to the Unknown value (?).
   The following statements show how you can set this attribute:

     DSLOG-MANAGER:DB-CONTEXT = "mymss".

     DSLOG-MANAGER:DB-CONTEXT = myvar.

     DSLOG-MANAGER:DB-CONTEXT = "myalias".







DB-LIST attribute
   A comma-separated list of logical database names that is stored in the client-principal object for all OpenEdge multi-tenant
   databases for which a connection identity has been set in one or more ABL sessions using this object. A given logical
   database name is stored in the client-principal object whenever a user authentication or single-sign-on operation using
   this object sets the multi-tenant database connection identity. You can use a database name from this list as input to the
   TENANT-ID( ) and TENANT-NAME( ) methods in order to retrieve the corresponding tenant name and tenant ID that
   has been stored along with it.
   Note: The list returned by this function omits the names of all non-multi-tenant databases for which the connection
   identity has been set using this client-principal object.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only

   Applies to: Client-principal object handle
   This attribute returns the:
   •   Unknown value (?) — If the client-principal object is not sealed
   •   Blank ("") value — If the client-principal object is sealed but has not yet been used to set identity for any OpenEdge
       database connections
   Tenant information is stored in the client-principal for each database connection whose identity is established by a user
   authentication or single sign-on (SSO) operation using this object (see the CONNECT statement, SET-DB-CLIENT
   function, SET-CLIENT( ) method on page 453, and SETUSERID function entries). Once stored in the client-principal,
   the tenant information for a given database never changes, regardless of how many ABL sessions use the object to set
   connection identity and regardless of the status of database connections in the current ABL session. Therefore, the
   existing tenant information is carried with the object as it is used to set additional database connection identities and as
   it is exported (using the EXPORT-PRINCIPAL( ) method on page 197) from one ABL session to another. This information
   can be removed only if the client-principal object is deleted or is re-initialized (using the INITIALIZE( ) method on
   page 272).
   ABL raises ERROR if you attempt to assign a value to this attribute.

   See also
   TENANT-ID( ) method on page 493, TENANT-NAME( ) method on page 494






DB-REFERENCES attribute
   A comma-separated list of the databases, (in the form of logical database names) referenced by an r-code file or by a
   persistent procedure. Returns the Unknown value (?) for a Web service procedure or proxy procedure.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Procedure object handle, RCODE-INFO handle, SOURCE-PROCEDURE system handle,
   TARGET-PROCEDURE system handle, THIS-PROCEDURE system handle
   The following example displays a list of all databases referenced by sample.r in a comma-separated list that is contained
   in the DB-REFERENCES attribute.

       RCODE-INFO:FILE-NAME = "sample.r".
       DISPLAY RCODE-INFO:DB-REFERENCES.






DBNAME attribute
   The logical name of the database from which the field is taken.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (column), Buffer object handle, Buffer-field object handle, COMBO-BOX widget,
   EDITOR widget, FILL-IN widget, RADIO-SET widget, RECTANGLE widget, SELECTION-LIST widget, SLIDER
   widget, TEXT widget, TOGGLE-BOX widget
   The default logical name for a database name is the name of the database file without the file extension. You can set the
   logical name of a database using the Logical Database Name (-ld) parameter.





DCOLOR attribute
   (Character Interfaces only)
   The color number for the display color of the widget in character mode. This attribute is ignored in graphical interfaces.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (browse, column, and cell), BUTTON widget, COMBO-BOX widget, DIALOG-BOX
   widget, EDITOR widget, FILL-IN widget, FRAME widget, LITERAL widget, MENU widget, MENU-ITEM widget,
   RADIO-SET widget, RECTANGLE widget, SELECTION-LIST widget, SLIDER widget, SUB-MENU widget, TEXT
   widget, TOGGLE-BOX widget, WINDOW widget
   For browse widgets, it is readable only. For a browse cell, it specifies the color of a specific cell in the view port. You
   can set this color only as the cell appears in the view port during a ROW-DISPLAY event.
   For rectangles, DCOLOR specifies the fill color. In windows, DCOLOR specifies the color inherited by the menu bar,
   if the menu bar has no color specified.
   The color number represents an entry in the color table maintained by the COLOR-TABLE handle.
   You can now change the color of the background of menu frames (including menubars, submenus and pop-up menus)
   using the DCOLOR attribute. Previously, specifying the DCOLOR attribute for menus only changed the default color
   for menu items. Now, the DCOLOR attribute will be applied to the menu frame also. Note that no syntax changes were
   made. You can still specify the DCOLOR attribute for individual menu items.
   For more information on widget color, see the PFCOLOR attribute on page 366.






DDE-ERROR attribute
   (Windows only)
   The error condition returned by the most recent exchange in a DDE conversation associated with the frame. A DDE
   function or a DDE-NOTIFY event initiates an exchange in a DDE conversation.
   This attribute is supported only for backward compatibility. Use the Component Object Model (COM) instead.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: FRAME widget
   The following table lists the possible errors returned by an exchange in a DDE conversation.
   Table 10: ABL DDE errors

   Error               Description
   1                   DDE INITIATE failure
   2                   A DDE statement (DDE ADVISE, DDE EXECUTE, DDE GET, DDE REQUEST, or DDE SEND)
                       time out
   3                   Memory allocation error
   4                   Invalid channel number (not an open conversation)
   5                   Invalid data item (in topic)
   6                   DDE ADVISE failure (data link not accepted)
   7                   DDE EXECUTE failure (commands not accepted)   Error              Description
    8                  DDE GET failure (data not available)
    9                  DDE SEND failure (data not accepted)
    10                 DDE REQUEST failure (data not available)
    11                 DDE-NOTIFY event failure (data not available)
    99                 Internal error (unknown)


   This attribute applies to any frame in Windows that is a Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) frame for a DDE conversation.






DDE-ID attribute
   (Windows only)
   The DDE channel number of the most recent conversation involved in an exchange.
   This attribute is supported only for backward compatibility. Use the Component Object Model (COM) instead.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: FRAME widget
   This attribute applies to any frame in Windows that is a Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) frame for a DDE conversation.






DDE-ITEM attribute
   (Windows only)
   The name of the data item affected by the most recent conversational exchange (for example, the name of a worksheet
   cell such as "R3C5").
   This attribute is supported only for backward compatibility. Use the Component Object Model (COM) instead.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: FRAME widget
   This attribute applies to any frame in Windows that is a Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) frame for a DDE conversation.






DDE-NAME attribute
   (Windows only)
   The name of the application involved in the most recent conversational exchange (for example, the name of a worksheet
   application such as "EXCEL").
   This attribute is supported only for backward compatibility. Use the Component Object Model (COM) instead.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: FRAME widget
   This attribute applies to any frame in Windows that is a Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) frame for a DDE conversation.






DDE-TOPIC attribute
   (Windows only)
   The topic name of the most recent conversation (for example, the "System" topic, or the name of an Excel worksheet
   such as "Sheet1").
   This attribute is supported only for backward compatibility. Use the Component Object Model (COM) instead.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: FRAME widget
   This attribute applies to any frame in Windows that is a Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) frame for a DDE conversation.






DEBLANK attribute
   How to process leading blanks in fill-in widgets during user input.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: FILL-IN widget
   This attribute applies to fill-ins for CHARACTER fields that are enabled for input.
   If the DEBLANK attribute is TRUE, the AVM removes leading blanks from the widget following user input that changes
   the SCREEN-VALUE attribute of the widget. Any leading blanks in the SCREEN-VALUE before input are not removed
   unless the user modifies the field. After the field is modified, the procedure must explicitly redisplay the field to view
   the effect of the DEBLANK attribute.






DEBUG( ) method
   Starts and initializes the Debugger, and immediately gives control to the Debugger in stand-alone mode while blocking
   the invoking procedure.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: DEBUGGER system handle

   Syntax

     DEBUG ( )

   This method has the same effect as starting OpenEdge with the Debugger (-debug) startup parameter, except that
   instead of running the Debugger from the OpenEdge command line, it runs it from the invoking procedure. The invoking
   procedure then waits to continue execution until the Debugger exits. Although the Debugger has no control over the
   invoking procedure, it can control any other procedure started with the Debugger RUN option.
   If the Debugger starts successfully, this method returns TRUE after the Debugger exits. Otherwise, it returns FALSE
   with no effect.
   Note: To use this method, you must have the Application Debugger installed in your OpenEdge environment.
   For more information about running the Debugger in stand-alone mode, see Troubleshoot ABL Applications. For more
   information about the DEBUGGER system handle, see DEBUGGER system handle.






DEBUG-ALERT attribute
   Indicates whether the AVM provides access to ABL and .NET stack trace information, where applicable, when an error
   occurs during a session. Its primary use is for error alert boxes, so you can determine where an error occurred in your
   code.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   When an unhandled ABL error or .NET Exception occurs in an interactive session for any ABL client, the AVM displays
   an Error message box. When DEBUG-ALERT is TRUE, the message box also includes a Help button, which when
   pressed, produces a Stack Trace dialog box containing ABL and .NET stack trace information. If the error was generated
   by throwing an error object from the ABL code and the Error Stack (-errorstack) startup parameter is used, or the
   ERROR-STACK-TRACE attribute on the SESSION system handle is set to TRUE, then the stack trace also includes
   the contents of the CallStack property for the unhandled error. The ABL and .NET stack traces are also written to
   the client log when the Client Logging (-clientlog) startup parameter is specified. The top of the stack (most recent
   call) is displayed at the top of the trace listing.
   You can also set DEBUG-ALERT to TRUE using the Debug Alert (-debugalert) startup parameter. For more
   information see Startup Command and Parameter Reference.
   For more information about debugging from an alert dialog box, see Troubleshoot ABL Applications.






DECIMALS attribute
   Indicates the number of decimal places, after the decimal point, that are stored for a buffer-field object that corresponds
   to a DECIMAL field. Valid values are zero (0) to ten (10). When DECIMALS is explicitly set (or is inherited from a
   database field via LIKE), the AVM rounds off any value that you assign via the BUFFER-VALUE() method of a buffer
   field handle (or via the "::" syntax on a buffer handle) to the specified number of decimal places before completing the
   assignment. If DECIMALS is not set, the AVM rounds the value off to 10 decimal places if necessary.
   If the WRITE-XML() method is used on the object containing the buffer field, then the XML Document generated will
   write the decimal field with the number of decimal places specified.
   Note: The AVM determines the number of decimal places to display, as opposed to store, from the FORMAT attribute
   (not the DECIMALS attribute) of the buffer-field.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writeable; Read-only if the buffer-field object handle is for a database field
   Applies to: Buffer-field object handle






DECLARE-NAMESPACE( ) method
   Adds a namespace declaration to a tag in the XML document represented by a SAX-writer object.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: SAX-writer object handle

   Syntax

     DECLARE-NAMESPACE ( namespace-URI[ , prefix] )


   namespace-URI

               A CHARACTER or LONGCHAR expression evaluating to the URI of the attribute.
   prefix
               A CHARACTER or LONGCHAR expression evaluating to the prefix of the namespace.
   Call this method to add a namespace declaration to a start tag. You can only call this method directly following a call
   to START-ELEMENT, WRITE-EMPTY-ELEMENT, INSERT-ATTRIBUTE, or DECLARE-NAMESPACE method.
   That is, you can only call this method when the WRITE-STATUS attribute is SAX-WRITE-TAG. The WRITE-STATUS
   attribute remains SAX-WRITE-TAG after this method call.
   Regardless of the value of the STRICT attribute, this method fails if you do not call it after one of the valid methods
   listed above.
   If you use an empty string ("") or the Unknown value (?) for the prefix, or you omit the prefix, then the method declares
   the default namespace: xmlns="namespace-URI".






DEFAULT attribute
   Indicates whether the button is a default button.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BUTTON widget
   If the DEFAULT attribute is TRUE, the specified button is a default button. To make the specified button the default
   button for the frame, you must also set the frame's DEFAULT-BUTTON attribute to the handle of the button. A default
   button is one that handles all RETURN events when no other RETURN-enabling widget in the frame or dialog box has
   focus. RETURN-enabling widgets include any field-level widget for which a RETURN trigger is defined, or any button,
   whether or not it has a trigger defined. Thus, if a button has focus, that button handles the next RETURN event. If any
   other field-level widget without a RETURN trigger has focus, the default button handles the next RETURN event.
   You can set this attribute only before the widget is realized.
   Note: When the frame receives a default RETURN event, it actually sends a CHOOSE event to the default button. If
   the user presses the RETURN key while in a frame that has no default button, and the frame is part of a frame family,
   the AVM applies the CHOOSE event to the first default button it can find within the frame family in random order.






DEFAULT-BUFFER-HANDLE attribute
   Like static temp-tables, every dynamic temp-table is created with at least one buffer. This buffer's object handle is
   returned by this attribute. DEFAULT-BUFFER-HANDLE cannot be called until the TEMP-TABLE-PREPARE( )
   method has been called, since the default buffer is not created until then.
   Data type: HANDLE
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Temp-table object handle






DEFAULT-BUTTON attribute
   Indicates whether a button is a default button for the frame or dialog box.
   Data type: HANDLE
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: DIALOG-BOX widget, FRAME widget
  
   To make the specified button the default button for the frame or dialog box, you must also set the button's DEFAULT
   attribute to TRUE.
   The DEFAULT-BUTTON attribute for frames is not supported in character mode.
   The default button cannot display an image.
   A default button is one that handles all RETURN events when no other RETURN-enabling widget in the frame or dialog
   box has focus. RETURN-enabling widgets include any field-level widget for which a RETURN trigger is defined, or
   any button, whether or not it has a trigger defined. Thus, if a button has focus, that button handles the next RETURN
   event. If any other field-level widget without a RETURN trigger has focus, the default button handles the next RETURN
   event.
   Note: When the frame receives a default RETURN event, it actually sends a CHOOSE event to the default button. If
   the user presses the RETURN key while in a frame that has no default button, and the frame is part of a frame family,
   the AVM applies the CHOOSE event to the first default button it can find within the frame family in random order.





DEFAULT-COMMIT attribute
   (PAS for OE only)
   Indicates how an open transaction under the control of a transaction initiating procedure is to complete if the procedure
   is deleted in the absence of any SET-COMMIT( ) method or SET-ROLLBACK( ) method.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Transaction object handle
   Setting the DEFAULT-COMMIT attribute to TRUE ensures that the transaction is completed. Setting it to FALSE
   ensures that the transaction is rolled back. The default value is FALSE.
   Note: One common event that can terminate an open transaction is deleting the transaction initiating procedure that
   created the transaction.






DEFAULT-STRING attribute
   The unformatted version of the INITIAL attribute.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Buffer-field object handle
   For example, consider the following temp-table definition:

     DEFINE TEMP-TABLE ttFoo
       FIELD dFoo AS DATE    INITIAL TODAY
       FIELD iFoo AS INTEGER INITIAL 5000.


   The DEFINE TEMP-TABLE statement defines the DATE field ttFoo.dFoo with an INITIAL value of TODAY. For
   this field, the INITIAL attribute is [today's date], formatted subject to SESSION:DATE-FORMAT. However, the
   DEFAULT-STRING attribute contains TODAY, the unformatted character value.
   The INTEGER field ttFoo.iFoo is defined with an INITIAL value of 5000. The INITIAL attribute is the formatted 5,000.
   The DEFAULT-STRING attribute contains the unformatted 5000.
   DEFAULT-STRING renders its dates and numeric values in LOCAL format, subject to the DATE-FORMAT and
   NUMERIC-FORMAT attributes of the SESSION system handle.

   See also
   DATE-FORMAT attribute on page 155, DEFAULT-VALUE attribute on page 163, INITIAL attribute on page 271,
   NUMERIC-FORMAT attribute on page 357






DEFAULT-VALUE attribute
   The initial value of a table column in the native data type of the buffer-field.
   Data type: The data type of the corresponding buffer-field
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: Buffer-field object handle
   For a DATE field with an INITIAL value of TODAY, DEFAULT-VALUE would contain a DATE value with today's
   date. For a DATETIME field with an INITIAL value of NOW, DEFAULT-VALUE would contain a DATETIME value
   with the current time. For a DECIMAL field, DEFAULT-VALUE would contain a DECIMAL value, as opposed to the
   INITIAL attribute, which has a CHARACTER data type.
   DEFAULT-VALUE is suitable for assignment into a newly created record, but not as the initial value in the
   ADD-NEW-FIELD( ) method. In this case, TODAY and NOW will be the values and not the special strings for TODAY
   and NOW. That is, DEFAULT-VALUE for the initial argument in ADD-NEW-FIELD( ) will return INITIAL [today's
   date], instead of INITIAL TODAY.
   In order for ADD-NEW-FIELD( ) to work correctly with an existing buffer for a new temp-table being dynamically
   built, you can use the ADD-LIKE-FIELD( ) method or, rather than using DEFAULT-VALUE, you can use the
   DEFAULT-STRING attribute, which is the unformatted, character data type version of the DEFAULT-VALUE including
   TODAY and NOW.

   See also
   ADD-LIKE-FIELD( ) method on page 46, ADD-NEW-FIELD( ) method on page 47, DATE-FORMAT attribute on
   page 155, DEFAULT-STRING attribute on page 162, INITIAL attribute on page 271, NUMERIC-FORMAT attribute on
   page 357






DELETE( ) method
   Deletes an item from a combo box, radio-set, or selection list.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (column), COMBO-BOX widget, RADIO-SET widget, SELECTION-LIST widget

   Syntax (combo-box, selection-list, or browse column)
   This is the syntax for a combo-box, selection-list, or browse column.

     DELETE ( list-index|list-item )


   list-index
                An integer expression that specifies the ordinal position of a value in the combo box list or selection
                list.
   list-item
                A character-string expression that specifies a single value or a delimiter-separated list of values in the
                widget.

   The DELETE( ) method removes the item specified by list-index, or removes the specified list-item from the list. list-item
   can represent multiple items. For example, you might specify DELETE( "Chicago,Boston,New York" ),
   where the delimiter is a comma. The delimiter is a comma by default or is specified by the DELIMITER attribute. If
   the method is successful, it returns TRUE.
   For browses, this method applies only to combo-box browse columns.

   Syntax (radio-set)
   This is the syntax for a radio-set.

     DELETE ( label )


   label
               A character-string expression that specifies an item to delete from the radio-set.
   The DELETE( ) method deletes the item from the radio-set, whose appearance changes depending on the user interface
   and the setting of the AUTO-RESIZE attribute. For all user interfaces, if AUTO-RESIZE is TRUE, the remaining items
   collapse toward the top to fill the gap left by the deleted item. If AUTO-RESIZE is FALSE in Windows, the remaining
   items are repositioned to evenly span the original radio-set dimensions; in character interfaces, the remaining items
   collapse upward as when AUTO-RESIZE is TRUE.
   If the method is successful, it returns TRUE.
   Note: A single call to DELETE can delete one or more items from a combo box or selection list, or one item from a
   radio set.





DELETE-CHAR( ) method
   Deletes the character at the current text cursor position.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: EDITOR widget

   Syntax

     DELETE-CHAR ( )


   If the character is successfully deleted, the method returns TRUE.






DELETE-CURRENT-ROW( ) method
   Deletes the most recently selected row from a browse and the results list.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: BROWSE widget

   Syntax

     DELETE-CURRENT-ROW ( )
   This method does not delete the record from the database and has no effect on the database buffer. If you then want to
   delete the database record associated with the row, use the DELETE statement.
   If the row is successfully deleted from the browse and results list, the method returns TRUE.





DELETE-HEADER-ENTRY( ) method
   Deletes the XML underlying a SOAP-header-entryref object, without deleting the object.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: SOAP-header-entryref object handle

   Syntax

     DELETE-HEADER-ENTRY ( )






DELETE-LINE( ) method
   Deletes the line that currently contains the text cursor.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: EDITOR widget

   Syntax

     DELETE-LINE ( )


   If the line is successfully deleted, the method returns TRUE.





DELETE-NODE( ) method
   Unlinks and deletes the node and its sub-tree from the XML document. The ABL handle is not deleted.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: X-noderef object handle

   Syntax

     DELETE-NODE( )


   The following example demonstrates the use of the DELETE-NODE( ) method. Only use this when you are through
   using the node and all of its descendants.

     hOldNode:DELETE-NODE( ).





DELETE-RESULT-LIST-ENTRY( ) method
   Deletes the current row of a query's result list.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: BROWSE widget, Query object handle

   Syntax

     DELETE-RESULT-LIST-ENTRY ( )

   For the browse, DELETE-RESULT-LIST-ENTRY( ) solves the following problem: Suppose you create a browse
   with a primary table and a secondary table, and in the primary table, the key to the secondary table changes. The AVM
   never displays the new secondary table because the result list entry contains the rowid of the original secondary table.
   When you use DELETE-RESULT-LIST-ENTRY( ) together with CREATE-RESULT-LIST-ENTRY( ), you can
   update the result list entry and display the modified row without having to reopen the query.
   For example, suppose you create a browse with customer.name, customer.salesrep, and salesrep.repname
   (from the Sports2020 database). Then, in one record of the browse, you change customer.salesrep from "bbb" to
   "dkp".
   Without using DELETE-RESULT-LIST-ENTRY( ), the secondary record remains "bbb" until the query is reopened.
   The following code fragment uses DELETE-RESULT-LIST-ENTRY( ) and CREATE-RESULT-LIST-ENTRY( )
   to display the modified secondary record:

     ON ROW-LEAVE OF my-brow DO:
       DEFINE VARIABLE num AS INTEGER NO-UNDO.
       DEFINE VARIABLE ok AS LOGICAL NO-UNDO.

        IF Customer.SalesRep:MODIFIED THEN DO:
          num = Customer.CustNum.
          ok = my-brow:DELETE-RESULT-LIST-ENTRY().

         /* DELETE-RESULT-LIST-ENTRY() disconnects recs from rec bufs, so re-read
            Customer and SalesRep records */
         FIND Customer WHERE Customer.CustNum EQ num.
         FIND SalesRep WHERE Salesrep.SalesRep EQ Customer.SalesRep:SCREEN-VALUE.
         /* Create new result list entry with "new" secondary table's rowid */
         ok = my-brow:CREATE-RESULT-LIST-ENTRY().
         /* Update viewport */
         DISPLAY SalesRep.RepName WITH BROWSE my-brow.
       END.
     END. /* ROW-LEAVE OF my-brow */


   Note: During this operation, the query pointer must not move.
   Note: The DELETE-RESULT-LIST-ENTRY() method cannot be used together with other assignments in a single
   ASSIGN statement.






DELETE-SELECTED-ROW( ) method
   Deletes the nth selected row from a browse and the results list.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: BROWSE widget

   Syntax

       DELETE-SELECTED-ROW ( n )


   n
               An integer expression that specifies a selected row within the browse.
   Note: Do not confuse the DELETE-SELECTED-ROW method (note the singular) with the DELETE-SELECTED-ROWS
   method (note the plural).
   The AVM maintains a numbered list of selected rows, starting at 1. When the DELETE-SELECTED-ROW( n ) method
   is encountered, the AVM searches this list to find the nth selected row.
   This method does not delete the record from the database and has no effect on the database buffer. If you want to delete
   the database record associated with the row, use the DELETE statement.
   If the row is successfully deleted, the method returns TRUE.
   If you want to delete all selected rows, whether it is one or many, DELETE-SELECTED-ROWS is the preferred,
   optimized method for doing so.






DELETE-SELECTED-ROWS( ) method
   Deletes all currently selected rows from a browse and the associated results list.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: BROWSE widget

   Syntax

       DELETE-SELECTED-ROW ( )

   Note: Do not confuse the DELETE-SELECTED-ROW method (note the singular) with the DELETE-SELECTED-ROWS
   method (note the plural).
   This method does not delete the record from the database and has no effect on the database buffer. If you want to delete
   the database record associated with the row, use the DELETE statement.
   If the row is successfully deleted, the method returns TRUE.
   Note: The DELETE-SELECTED-ROWS() method cannot be used together with other assignments in a single ASSIGN
   statement.






DELIMITER attribute
   The character that separates values input to or output from a combo box or selection list.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (column), COMBO-BOX widget, RADIO-SET widget, SELECTION-LIST widget
   Delimiter character can have any ASCII value from 1 to 127. The default delimiter is a comma.
   For browses, this attribute applies only to combo-box browse columns.






DESCRIPTION attribute
   A character description of the current profiling session. This string is included as part of the data that is written to the
   profile output file. The default value is the unknown value (?).
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writable
   Applies to: PROFILER system handle






DESELECT-FOCUSED-ROW( ) method
   Deselects the row with current focus.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: BROWSE widget

   Syntax

       DESELECT-FOCUSED-ROW ( )


   This method is ignored on single-select browse widgets, because focus follows selection.





DESELECT-ROWS( ) method
   Deselects all currently selected rows in the browse and clears the associated record buffer.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: BROWSE widget

   Syntax

       DESELECT-ROWS ( )


   If the rows are successfully deselected, the method returns TRUE.






DESELECT-SELECTED-ROW( ) method
   Deselects the nth selected row in a browse.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: BROWSE widget

   Syntax

       DESELECT-SELECTED-ROW ( n )


   n
               An integer expression that specifies a selected row within the browse.

   The AVM maintains a numbered list of selected rows, starting at 1. When the DESELECT-SELECTED-ROW( n )
   method is encountered, the AVM searches this list to find the nth selected row. If the row is successfully deselected, the
   method returns TRUE.






DETACH-DATA-SOURCE( ) method
   Detaches a data-source object from a temp-table buffer in a ProDataSet object.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Buffer object handle

   See also
   ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE( ) method on page 62






DIRECTORY attribute
   The directory to which the output file is stored. The attribute cannot be set to the unknown value (?), and only accepts
   a valid directory. The default value is either the -T directory or the current working directory if -T was not specified.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writable
   Applies to: PROFILER system handle






DISABLE( ) method
   Disables the radio set button. The selected radio-set button's SCREEN-VALUE is changed to the first enabled radio set
   button or to the Unknown value (?) if all radio set buttons are disabled.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: RADIO-SET widget

   Syntax

     DISABLE ( label )


   label
               A character-string expression that specifies the label of a button in the radio set.
   If the operation is successful, the method returns TRUE.






DISABLE-AUTO-ZAP attribute
   Indicates whether the AVM ignores the value of the AUTO-ZAP attribute.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget (column), COMBO-BOX widget, FILL-IN widget
   If DISABLE-AUTO-ZAP is TRUE, the AVM ignores the value of the AUTO-ZAP attribute and assumes it is FALSE.
   If the DISABLE-AUTO-ZAP attribute is FALSE, the AVM assumes the value of the AUTO-ZAP attribute is TRUE.





DISABLE-CONNECTIONS( ) method
   Indicates that the AVM no longer listen for or accept new connections on the port associated with the server socket.
   However, all existing connections are still valid.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Server socket object handle

   Syntax

     DISABLE-CONNECTIONS( )


   Returns TRUE if connections are disabled for this server socket object, even if the server socket object was never enabled
   or was already disabled.





DISABLE-DUMP-TRIGGERS( ) method
   Allows a user to access a buffer object's table without firing FIND triggers.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Buffer object handle

   Syntax

     DISABLE-DUMP-TRIGGERS ( )

   To run this method, the end user must have CAN-DUMP privileges for the table.
   Triggers cannot be disabled from a persistent procedure.
   The FIND trigger remains disabled until the procedure in which it is disabled returns.

   See also
   DISABLE TRIGGERS statement





DISABLE-LOAD-TRIGGERS( ) method
   Allows you to create or update a buffer object's table without executing update triggers such as CREATE, WRITE,
   DELETE or ASSIGN.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Buffer object handle

   Syntax

     DISABLE-LOAD-TRIGGERS ( allow-replication )


   allow-replication
               A LOGICAL expression indicating whether to disable or allow replication triggers. When TRUE,
               replication triggers are allowed to run, including the DELETE trigger. When FALSE, all triggers are
               disabled.
   To run this method, you must have CAN-LOAD privileges for the table.
   Triggers cannot be loaded from a persistent procedure.
   The triggers remain disabled until the procedure in which it is disabled returns.
   Note: The Disable Delete Trigger (-disabledeltrig) startup parameter disables the DELETE trigger when
   ALLOW-REPLICATION is on for the DISABLE TRIGGERS statement or the DISABLE-LOAD-TRIGGER() buffer
   method. For more information about this parameter, see Startup Command and Parameter Reference.

   See also
   DISABLE TRIGGERS statement





DISCONNECT( ) method (Handle)
   Disconnects the client from the application server or Web service currently associated with the specified server handle.
   For the socket, closes the socket by terminating the connection between the socket and the port to which it is connected.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Server object handle, Server socket object handle

   Syntax

       DISCONNECT ( )

   When the application server receives a disconnect request:
   •   For a session-managed application server — Control returns immediately to the client application, and any
       configured Disconnect procedure executes in the connected application server session.
   •   For a state-free application server — Any configured Disconnect procedure executes in an available application
       server session, then control returns to the client application.
   •   For any application server with pending asynchronous requests— All running or pending asynchronous requests
       are cancelled and the associated event procedure or method is called for each request. The CANCELLED attribute
       on the asynchronous request handle for all such cancelled requests is set to TRUE.
   If an error occurs during the disconnection from an application server, DISCONNECT( ) returns FALSE. An error
   occurs if:
   •   The server handle is invalid.
   •   The server is either not connected or already disconnected.
   If DISCONNECT( ) completes successfully, the CONNECTED( ) method returns FALSE. In addition, all attributes of
   the SERVER object (except for the FIRST PROCEDURE and LAST PROCEDURE attributes) are restored to their
   initial state. Specifically, SUBTYPE returns the Unknown value (?).
   For sockets, the AVM automatically closes a socket if it detects that the connection to which the socket is bound has
   failed or been terminated.






DISPLAY-MESSAGE( ) method
   Displays a message in an alert box. The Debugger stores these messages and displays them to the user in an alert box
   when the Debugger regains control of an application.
   Return type: INTEGER
   Applies to: DEBUGGER system handle

   Syntax

     DISPLAY-MESSAGE ( char-expression )


   char-expression
              Any character expression.
   This method appends a new line to char-expression before displaying the specified string. If the Debugger is initialized
   and char-expression is a valid character expression, this method returns TRUE. Otherwise, it returns FALSE with no
   effect.
   Note: To use this method, you must have the Application Debugger installed in your OpenEdge environment.






DISPLAY-TIMEZONE attribute
   The time zone offset, in minutes, used to display DATETIME-TZ data. The default value is the session's time zone
   offset.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: SESSION system handle
   If the format string for the DATETIME-TZ does not include the time zone offset, the AVM converts the DATETIME-TZ
   data to the local date and time and displays the data with the time zone offset specified by this attribute.
   If the format string for the DATETIME-TZ includes the time zone offset, the AVM ignores this attribute and displays
   the data in the local time of the value, along with the time zone offset.
   Set this attribute to the Unknown value (?) to use the session's time zone offset for display.






DISPLAY-TYPE attribute
   The type of display for an r-code file or session.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: RCODE-INFO handle, SESSION system handle
   With the RCODE-INFO handle, the DISPLAY-TYPE attribute holds a value of "GUI" for a graphical display, "TTY"
   for a character-mode display, or a blank string ("") for code that does not contain any display-specific statements. Use
   of this attribute allows developers to determine if the r-code contains statements that make it executable only in the same
   display environment on which it was compiled. If r-code contains ABL statements that interact with the UI (such as
   DISPLAY), it can only be executed in the same UI. The same restriction does not apply to r-code that does not contain
   UI-specific statements.
   With the SESSION handle, the DISPLAY-TYPE attribute holds a value of "GUI" for a graphical display or "TTY" for
   a character-mode display, depending on the display type of the running session.





DOMAIN-DESCRIPTION attribute
   The description of the domain in which the user represented by the client-principal object was authenticated. If not
   specified, the AVM returns a blank ("") character string.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Client-principal object handle
   If not already assigned, during any OpenEdge-performed user authentication operation, OpenEdge assigns the value of
   this attribute (if any) from the domain configuration used to authenticate the asserted identity before sealing the
   client-principal object.
   Once the client-principal object is sealed, this attribute is read-only, and attempting to write to it raises a run-time error.

   See also
   DOMAIN-NAME attribute on page 173, DOMAIN-TYPE attribute on page 174






DOMAIN-NAME attribute
   The name of the OpenEdge domain in which to authenticate the user identity represented by the unsealed client-principal
   object. This domain is also configured with an access code used to validate the same identity after the client-principal
   has been sealed. You must set this attribute before you can seal the associated client-principal object with the:
   •   SEAL( ) method on page 431 as part of an application-performed user authentication operation
   •   SET-CLIENT( ) method on page 453 or SET-DB-CLIENT function in an OpenEdge-performed user authentication
       operation
   The domain name you specify must match a domain entry registered in the trusted domain registry. Along with the
   domain access code, this entry identifies the authentication system used to validate the user's identity for user authentication
   and single sign-on (SSO) operations and specifies the user's tenancy for multi-tenant database connections in which
   their identity is set. For more information on domains, authentication systems, and database tenancy, see Learn about
   Identity Management.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Client-principal object handle
   You can assign this attribute the following values:
   •   Empty string ("") — The default blank domain name
   •   Non-empty, case-insensitive string — A maximum of 64 characters from the following restricted character set:
       •   a to z
       •   A to Z
       •   0 to 9
       •   Any of the following seven special characters:

             # $ % & - _ .

   This attribute can be set using the INITIALIZE( ) method on page 272 or the QUALIFIED-USER-ID attribute on page
   375. Writing this attribute directly overwrites any value previously set by any mechanism.
   If the attribute has never been initialized, reading its value returns the empty string (""). Otherwise, it returns the most
   recent setting using the INITIALIZE( ) method, QUALIFIED-USER-ID attribute, or the DOMAIN-NAME attribute,
   itself.
   Once the client-principal object is sealed, this attribute is read-only, and attempting to write to it raises a run-time error.
   ABL also raises ERROR if you attempt to assign:
   •   The Unknown value (?)
   •   Any character expression that does not conform to domain name length and character set restrictions
   •   A character expression when the client-principal object is sealed and in the LOGIN, LOGOUT, EXPIRED, or
       FAILED state (see the LOGIN-STATE attribute on page 321 entry)

   See also
   DOMAIN-DESCRIPTION attribute on page 173, DOMAIN-TYPE attribute on page 174, INITIALIZE( ) method on
   page 272, QUALIFIED-USER-ID attribute on page 375, USER-ID attribute on page 508






DOMAIN-TYPE attribute
   The name of the authentication system that is configured for the domain specified by the DOMAIN-NAME attribute
   on page 173. This authentication system authenticates or validates the user identity represented by the client-principal
   object.
   Note: The name assigned to this attribute is for information purposes only and does not participate in authentication
   operations. OpenEdge always uses the name in the domain configuration itself to identify the authentication system to
   use.
   The configured authentication system determines the operation type (user authentication, single sign-on (SSO), or both)
   and mechanism (OpenEdge-defined or application-defined) that is available to validate and set a given user identity.
   For more information on authentication systems, see Learn about Identity Management.
   Data type: CHARACTER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: Client-principal object handle
   If the attribute has not been set, reading it returns the empty string ("").
   If not already assigned, during any OpenEdge-performed user authentication operation, OpenEdge assigns the value of
   this attribute from the domain configuration used to authenticate the asserted identity before sealing the client-principal
   object.
   Once the client-principal object is sealed, this attribute is read-only, and attempting to write to it raises a run-time error.

   See also
   DOMAIN-DESCRIPTION attribute on page 173, DOMAIN-NAME attribute on page 173






DOWN attribute
   Indicates the number of iterations in a down frame that contain data or number of potential rows in a browse widget.
   For a one-down frame, the value of DOWN is 1. Sets the number of browse-rows that appear in the viewport.
   Data type: INTEGER
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget, FRAME widget

   In character mode, the DOWN attribute must be set before the browse is realized. Attempting to set the attribute after
   realization of the browse causes a run-time error.
   If you change the value of a browse's DOWN attribute, you change the number of rows that appear in the viewport,
   which might change the value of the browse's HEIGHT-CHARS and HEIGHT-PIXELS attributes. Changing the value
   of a browse's DOWN attribute does not change the value of the browse's ROW-HEIGHT-CHARS and
   ROW-HEIGHT-PIXELS attributes.
   Note: If the browse's height is set with the DOWN attribute and a browse column is added using the
   ADD-CALC-COLUMN( ), ADD-COLUMNS-FROM( ) or ADD-LIKE-COLUMN( ) methods, the browse's height may
   change to ensure that the number of DOWN is preserved.






DRAG-ENABLED attribute
   Indicates whether the user can simultaneously hold down the mouse select button and drag the mouse cursor through
   the selection list. As the mouse cursor passes over an item, the item is highlighted. When the user releases the select
   button, the highlighted item becomes the selected item.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writeable
   Applies to: SELECTION-LIST widget
   In this style of selecting, a user can deselect an item only by selecting another. Once an item is selected, the list cannot
   revert to its unselected state.
   The default value for this attribute is TRUE.
   Note: In Windows, DRAG-ENABLED is always TRUE.
   You can set this attribute only before the widget is realized.






DROP-TARGET attribute
   (Windows only; Graphical interfaces only)
   Indicates whether the widget can accept dropped files.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Readable/Writable
   Applies to: BROWSE widget, BUTTON widget, COMBO-BOX widget, DIALOG-BOX widget, EDITOR widget,
   FILL-IN widget, FRAME widget, RADIO-SET widget, SELECTION-LIST widget, SLIDER widget, TOGGLE-BOX
   widget, WINDOW widget
   If DROP-TARGET is TRUE, dragging one or more files over the widget causes the mouse pointer to change to indicate
   that the widget can accept the files. The default value of DROP-TARGET is FALSE.
   For related information, see the reference entries for the DROP-TARGET option of the DEFINE BROWSE statement,
   DEFINE BUTTON statement, DEFINE FRAME statement, and DEFINE VARIABLE statement.






DUMP-LOGGING-NOW( ) method
   Writes the accumulated query statistics to the log file for the query associated with a query handle.
   Return type: LOGICAL
   Applies to: Query object handle
   Syntax

       DUMP-LOGGING-NOW ( reset-expression )


   reset-expression
              A logical expression where TRUE indicates that the AVM clear the query statistics after writing the
              statistics to the log file, and FALSE indicates that the AVM leave the query statistics unchanged.
   If the AVM writes the query statistics to the log file successfully, the method returns TRUE. If the AVM does not write
   the query statistics to the log file, the method returns FALSE. The AVM does not write query statistics to the log file
   under the following conditions:
   •   QryInfo logging for the specified query was not turned on before the query started.
       To turn on basic logging for an individual query, you must set the BASIC-LOGGING attribute to TRUE before a
       query starts. For a dynamically opened query, this is before the QUERY-PREPARE( ) method on page 378. For a
       statically opened query, this is before the OPEN QUERY statement.
   •   QryInfo logging was turned off for the specified query, or all queries, before the query completed.
   You can use the DUMP-LOGGING-NOW( ) method only when the logging level of the QryInfo log entry type is set
   to level 2 (Basic) or higher. To set the logging level of the QryInfo log entry type, use the LOG-ENTRY-TYPES attribute
   on page 313 or the Log Entry Types (-logentrytypes) startup parameter with the logging level option.
   If the logging level of the QryInfo log entry type is set to level 2 (Basic), the DUMP-LOGGING-NOW( ) method writes
   query statistics to the log file only if the BASIC-LOGGING attribute on page 70 is set to TRUE before the query started.
   For more information about the Log Entry Types (-logentrytypes) startup parameter, see Startup Command and
   Parameter Reference.
   For more information about logging query statistics, see Troubleshoot ABL Applications.






DYNAMIC attribute
   Indicates whether the widget is dynamic or static.
   Data type: LOGICAL
   Access: Read-only
   Applies to: BROWSE widget, Buffer object handle, BUTTON widget, COMBO-BOX widget, CONTROL-FRAME
   widget, DIALOG-BOX widget, EDITOR widget, FIELD-GROUP widget, FILL-IN widget, FRAME widget, IMAGE
   widget, LITERAL widget, MENU widget, MENU-ITEM widget, ProDataSet object handle, Query object handle,
   RADIO-SET widget, RECTANGLE widget, SELECTION-LIST widget, SLIDER widget, SUB-MENU widget,
   Temp-table object handle, TEXT widget, TOGGLE-BOX widget, WINDOW widget
   If the DYNAMIC attribute is TRUE, the widget is dynamic, otherwise it is static.



