Accessing handle attributes and methods
    A handle attribute is a value that defines a visible, functional, and other characteristic of an ABL handle-based object.
    System handles also have attributes that describe and control certain handle-based object or system states. Attributes
    can be readable, writeable, or both. Readable means that your code can assign the value of the attribute to a variable or
    reference its value in an expression. Writeable means that your code can change the value of an attribute and thereby
    change the associated characteristic of the object or system state. Whether or not an attribute is readable or writeable
    depends on a number of factors (for example, the widget type, system handle type, widget realization, etc.).
    A handle method is a specialized function associated with an ABL handle-based object that performs an action on the
    object, or alters the behavior of the object. Some system handles also have methods that affect certain widget and system
    behaviors. All methods return a value and some methods require parameters. The return value usually is a logical value
    specifying whether or not the execution of the method was successful. However, some methods return other types of
    information.

Handle-based references
    You must access all handle attributes and methods with reference to a handle-based object or its handle using this general
    syntax:

    Syntax

        handle-based-reference : attribute-or-method-access
          [ IN container-widget-name ]


    The handle-based-reference must conform to the following syntax:

        { object-name-reference | handle-reference }


    An object-name-reference is a name reference to a static handle-based object, such as the defined name of a frame or
    window, or of another static handle-based object, such as a temp-table or buffer. For more information, see Object name
    references on page 30. A handle-reference can be a handle value that references any handle-based object (static or
    dynamic), or it can be a system handle. For more information, see Handle references on page 31.
    The attribute-or-method-access identifies a given attribute or method associated with the specified handle-based-reference.
    The container-widget-name is a name reference to a static container widget for the static widget referenced by
    object-name-reference. You need it only if the static widget reference is ambiguous.
    For more information on attribute-or-method-access and how to access:
    •   Attributes, see Handle attribute access on page 32
    •   Methods, see Handle method calls on page 32
    The following sections provide more information on the object-name-reference and handle-reference options.

    Object name references
    An object-name-reference can have the following syntax, depending on the static handle-based object:

    Syntax

        [ object-type ] object-name
                                                                                    
The object-type is the type of the static handle-based object specified in the DEFINE statement for the handle-based
object, such as FRAME in the DEFINE FRAME statement or TEMP-TABLE in the DEFINE TEMP-TABLE statement.
For a data representation widget associated with a field or variable, object-type is the widget specified using the VIEW-AS
phrase, such as COMBO-BOX for VIEW-AS COMBO-BOX.
The object-name is the name that you specify for the static handle-based object using the DEFINE statement for the
handle-based object. For a data representation widget, it is the name of the field or variable associated with the widget.
For static frame fields, you only need to provide the object-name (field or variable name) to reference the associated
widget, and ABL looks for its data representation widget in a frame. However, for most other static handle-based objects,
you must qualify the object-name with the object-type, for example, BUFFER Customer, QUERY qCust, or TEMP-TABLE
ttCust.
For example, in this code fragment, the handle to a frame field (dDate) and the handle to a buffer object (bCust) are
both returned and assigned to handle variables using the HANDLE attribute of each handle-based object:

  DEFINE VARIABLE hField AS HANDLE NO-UNDO.
  DEFINE VARIABLE hObject AS HANDLE NO-UNDO.
  DEFINE VARIABLE dDate   AS DATE   NO-UNDO VIEW-AS FILL-IN.

  DEFINE BUFFER bCust FOR Customer.

  DEFINE FRAME AFrame
    dDate bCust.Name.

  hField = dDate:HANDLE /* Widget name found in frame AFrame */.
  hObject = BUFFER bCust:HANDLE.



Handle references
A handle-reference allows you to directly reference a handle-based object using a handle value. You can set this handle
value by assigning the HANDLE attribute of a static handle-based object (see Object name references on page 30), by
creating a dynamic handle-based object, by assigning the handle value provided by a system handle, or from any other
source of handle values, such as method or function return values. Examples of handle references include
CURRENT-WINDOW and BUFFER bCust:HANDLE (from the previous example).
You can access the handle to a static handle-based object using a HANDLE data type (field or variable) that you set to
the value of the HANDLE attribute on the static object name reference.
You can access the handle for a dynamic handle-based object through a HANDLE data type (field or variable) whose
value is initially set using the CREATE statement for the specified handle-based object. You can also access the handle
value to some dynamic handle-based objects, as in the case of a procedure object, that you initially obtain using an
appropriate RUN statement or system handle.
The HANDLE attribute of a given object handle can also provide a valid handle value that references the same
handle-based object as the given object handle, itself. For example, the following assignment statements set both hProc1
and hProc2 to the same running procedure object using the THIS-PROCEDURE system handle and its HANDLE
attribute, and the MESSAGE statement displays the FILE-NAME attribute for the same procedure object:

  DEFINE VARIABLE hProc1 AS HANDLE NO-UNDO.
  DEFINE VARIABLE hProc2 AS HANDLE NO-UNDO.

  /* hProc1 equals hProc2 */
  hProc1 = THIS-PROCEDURE.
  hProc2 = THIS-PROCEDURE:HANDLE.

  MESSAGE hProc1:FILE-NAME SKIP hProc2:FILE-NAME VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.
                                                                                         
Handle attribute access
    To access a handle attribute, use the following syntax:

    Syntax

      widget-reference : attribute-name [ IN container-widget-name ]


    The widget-reference is a reference to a handle-based object (see Handle-based references on page 30). The attribute-name
    specifies the ABL-defined name of a handle-based object attribute. The container-widget-name is a name reference to
    a static container for a static widget. You need it only if the static widget reference is ambiguous without it, as shown
    in the following example. For more information on accessing attributes, see Accessing handle attributes and methods
    on page 30.
    To read an attribute value, assign the attribute value to a field or variable of a compatible data type, pass the attribute
    as an input parameter to some procedure, function, or method, or include the attribute in an expression. To write an
    attribute value, assign the value to the attribute or pass the attribute as an output parameter to some procedure, function,
    or method.
    The following example repositions a selection list (Select-1) to another row in the specified frame (SelectFrameA):

      DEFINE VARIABLE Select-1 AS CHARACTER NO-UNDO
        VIEW-AS SELECTION-LIST SIZE 50.0 BY 10.0.

      DEFINE FRAME SelectFrameA Select-1.
      DEFINE FRAME SelectFrameB Select-1.

      Select-1:ROW IN FRAME SelectFrameA = Select-1:ROW + 2.


    Note that ABL assumes that the second reference to Select-1 within the same assignment statement is in the same
    frame that is specified for the first reference.

Handle method calls
    To invoke (execute) a handle method, use the following syntax:

    Syntax

      widget-reference : method-name ( [ parameter-list ] )
        [ IN container-widget-name ]


    The widget-reference is a reference to a handle-based object (see Handle-based references on page 30). The method-name
    specifies the ABL-defined name of a handle method, and parameter-list specifies any parameter list for the method.
    The container-widget-name is a name reference to a static container for a static widget. You need it only if the static
    widget reference is ambiguous, as shown in the following example. To execute a handle method, you can assign the
    return value directly to a variable, include the method in an expression, or directly invoke the method as a statement
    (terminated with a period), ignoring its return value. 

   The following example executes the ADD-FIRST( ) method for a selection list (Select-1) in two different
   ways—assigning the return value to a logical variable (methRtn) and invoking it directly, without assigning a value:

     DEFINE VARIABLE Select-1 AS CHARACTER NO-UNDO
       VIEW-AS SELECTION-LIST SIZE 50.0 BY 10.0.
     DEFINE VARIABLE methRtn AS LOGICAL    NO-UNDO.

     DEFINE FRAME SelectFrameA Select-1.
     DEFINE FRAME SelectFrameB Select-1.

     methRtn = Select-1:ADD-FIRST("BLUE") IN FRAME SelectFrameA.
     Select-1:ADD-FIRST("GREEN") IN FRAME SelectFrameB.




Chained handle references
   A chained handle reference has the following syntax:

   Syntax

     widget-reference : attribute-or-method-reference
       [ : attribute-or-method-reference ] ...


   A chained handle reference allows you to reference multiple object handles in a series that terminates with a final handle
   attribute or method. The widget-reference specifies a handle-based object (see Handle-based references on page 30).
   The attribute-or-method-reference can be any appropriate attribute or method of the referenced handle-based object
   immediately preceding it. When you use this syntax, the middle handle attributes and methods must return a data type
   of HANDLE in order to allow an additional handle reference in the chain, until the final handle attribute or method is
   accessed, which can return any ABL data type.
   The following example shows a chained handle reference (see also Widget phrase, HANDLE function):

     DEFINE VARIABLE hBuff AS HANDLE NO-UNDO.

     CREATE BUFFER hBuff FOR TABLE "Customer".
     MESSAGE hBuff:BUFFER-FIELD(3):NAME.




Widget color, font, and measurement values
   Some entries in this section refer to color and font values (for example, BGCOLOR and FONT). These values are color
   and font numbers established for your system. Some entries in this section also refer to character units, an ABL unit of
   measure for specifying portable widget sizes and positions in graphical environments. For more information on color
   and font values, or character units and their relationship to pixels, see OpenEdge Programming Interfaces.
   Note: When you assign a decimal value to an attribute representing a measurement in character units, ABL automatically
   rounds the assigned value to the nearest decimal value that corresponds to whole pixel units.


Accessing COM object properties and methods
   A COM object property is a value that defines the visible, functional, and other characteristics of a COM object (ActiveX
   Automation object or ActiveX control). An ActiveX control property is classified as a design-time or run-time property
    depending on when you can change it. A design-time property can be changed using the Properties Window of the
    AppBuilder. A run-time property can be changed from ABL at run time. Generally, you can read both design-time and
    run-time properties at run time. In all other respects, COM object properties are functionally analogous to handle
    attributes.
    A COM object method is a specialized function associated with a COM object that performs an action on the COM
    object or alters the behavior of the COM object. COM object methods may or may not return a value and may or may
    not require parameters. A return value may be a component handle to another COM object; however, many methods
    return other types of information or no information at all. Like handle methods, you execute COM object methods by
    calling them directly as statements rather than as part of an expression. In all other respects, COM object methods are
    functionally analogous to handle methods.
    The basic syntax for accessing COM object properties and methods from ABL is similar to accessing handle attributes
    and methods. These are the main differences:
    •   You must access a COM object property or method with reference to an instantiated COM object. ABL supports the
        COM-HANDLE data type to provide COM object references for accessing properties and methods.
    •   You might have to specify the parameters of COM object methods with more type information, depending on the
        method and how the COM object is implemented.
    •   All COM objects are dynamic objects, so you never qualify a COM object reference by a static container reference
        (such as a static frame or menu widget).

Syntax for accessing COM object properties and methods
    This section describes the three basic types of ABL statements for accessing properties and methods.
    •   Property write on page 34
    •   Property read on page 34
    •   Method call on page 35
    Note: You can access COM object properties and methods from many other types of ABL statements that use these
    properties and methods in a similar fashion. The following statements, however, illustrate all the basic mechanisms for
    accessing COM objects from ABL.

    Property write
    The following syntax describes a basic assignment (=) statement for writing a COM object property:

    Syntax

        Com-Handle-Var :COMProperty [ AS Data-type ] = expression
          [ NO-ERROR ]


    Com-Handle-Var is any COM-HANDLE variable set to the handle of an instantiated COM object. COMProperty is a
    COM object property access (see COMProperty on page 35). Data-type is any supported COM data type (see Data-type
    on page 36) that is compatible with expression. The expression is any combination of ABL elements that results in a
    single value. NO-ERROR allows the application to handle any ABL ERROR conditions raised by the statement.

    Property read
    The following syntax describes a basic assignment (=) statement for writing a COM object property:

    Syntax

        [ { field | COMProperty } = ]
          Com-Handle-Var :COMProperty [ NO-ERROR ]


A field is any ABL variable, database field, class-based data member or property, or handle attribute of a compatible
data type. COMProperty is a COM object property access (see COMProperty on page 35). Com-Handle-Var is any
COM-HANDLE variable set to the handle of an instantiated COM object. NO-ERROR allows the application to handle
any ABL ERROR conditions raised by the statement.

Method call
The following syntax describes either a basic assignment (=) statement for invoking a COM object method that returns
a value or the basic statement for invoking a COM object method directly that ignores any returned value:

Syntax

  { field } =
    Com-Handle-Var:Method-Name( [ param [ , param ] ... ] )
    [ NO-ERROR ]



  Com-Handle-Var:Method-Name( [ param [ , param ] ... ] )
    [ NO-ERROR ]


field
           Any ABL variable, database field, class-based data member or property, or handle attribute of a
           compatible data type. This can also be a COM object property (see COMProperty on page 35).
Com-Handle-Var
           Any COM-HANDLE variable set to the handle of an instantiated COM object.
Method-Name
         The name of the method to invoke.
param
           The following syntax describes how to specify a parameter for a COM object method:

               { [ OUTPUT | INPUT-OUTPUT ] expression [ AS Data-type ]
                [ BY-POINTER | BY-VARIANT-POINTER ] }


           expression
           Can be any valid ABL expression or data element.
           Data-type
           A supported COM data type that is compatible with the expression. For information on COM data
           types and on OUTPUT, INPUT-OUTPUT, BY-POINTER, and BY-VARIANT-POINTER, see Data-type
           on page 36.
           There is currently no support for named parameters, for example: Method-Name(Color="GREEN",
           Shape="SQUARE").
           If a parameter is optional you may omit it from the parameter list, but you still need to retain the comma
           to indicate its position. For example, ComObject:ComMethod(param1,param2,,,param5).
NO-ERROR
       Allows the application to handle any error condition raised by the statement.
Note: You can optionally chain COM object references.

COMProperty
The following syntax describes a COM object property access with optional chaining of COM object references:


   Syntax

     [ { COMProperty | COMMethod } : ] ...
       Property-Name [ ( index [ , index ] ... ) ]


   Property-Name is the name of the accessed property. The optional multi-level index is an integer expression as required
   by the property. You must not follow the colon separator by a space.
   Any COMProperty or COMMethod that precedes the final Property-Name must return a COM object reference that
   provides access to the immediately following Property-Name. The final property access can return any supported COM
   data type.

   Data-type
   The following syntax lists the supported COM data types for specifying any Data-type required for accessing a COM
   object property or method:

   Syntax

     SHORT | FLOAT | CURRENCY | UNSIGNED-BYTE | ERROR-CODE | IUNKNOWN


   The requirements for using the OUTPUT, INPUT-OUTPUT, BY-VARIANT-POINTER, BY-POINTER, and AS
   Data-type options depend on the COM object method or property, the implementation of the COM object, and how you
   plan to use the parameter or property in your application. In many cases, expression is all that you require for a property
   write or method parameter. 