Class-based data member access
   References a data member of a class in order to read or write its value.

   Syntax

       [ [ class-type-name | object-reference ] : ] data-member-name
          [[ index ]]


   class-type-name
               The name of an ABL or .NET class type that defines the specified data member as a static member.
               The use of class-type-name to access a static data member is optional when you access the data member
               from within the class hierarchy where it is defined. For more information, see the notes for this reference
               entry. You can use class-type-name only to access data members that can be defined as PUBLIC. For
               more information, see the notes for this reference entry. You cannot use class-type-name to access an
               instance data member. For more information on specifying class (object) type names, see the Type-name
               syntax on page 1011 reference entry. You also can use the unqualified class name with the presence of
               an appropriate USING statement on page 1035.
                                                                                                        
object-reference
            Specifies a reference to an instance of an ABL or .NET class (an object) that defines the specified data
            member as an instance member. The use of object-reference to access an instance data member is
            optional when you access the data member from within the class hierarchy where it is defined. For
            more information, see the notes for this reference entry.For more information, see the notes for this
            reference entry. You cannot use object-reference to access a static data member. For information on
            specifying object references, see the reference entry for a Class-based object reference on page 127.
data-member-name
         The name of a data member you want to access. In .NET, a data member is referred to as a field. A
         data member is a data element that is defined in, and at, the level of a class definition (as distinct from
         a local data element that is defined in and at the level of a method definition). If it is an instance data
         member, a separate copy exists for each instance of its defining class, for as long as the class instance
         exists. If it is a static data member, only one copy exists for the defining class type for the entire ABL
         session, regardless if any instance of the class exists. A data member is available either inside or outside
         of the class hierarchy depending on its access mode.
[ index ]
            Specifies the index to reference an element of an ABL array data member, where index is an integer
            value that identifies the element. The brackets are a required part of the index syntax.
            Note: To access the elements of a .NET array object, you must use the .NET SetValue( ) and
            GetValue( ) methods on the array object instead. For more information on using these methods,
            see the .NET documentation and Parameter passing syntax on page 783.

Examples
The following code fragment shows a reference to a public instance data member (hHighCustData) on an instance
of the sample class, r-CustObj:

    DEFINE VARIABLE rObj AS CLASS r-CustObj NO-UNDO.
    rObj = NEW r-CustObj( ) NO-ERROR.

    MESSAGE "Number of buffers =" rObj:hHighCustData:NUM-BUFFERS
      VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.


This instance data member is a handle to a ProDataSet that is used, in this case, to reference the NUM-BUFFERS
attribute, which returns the number of buffers in the ProDataSet.
The following code fragment shows a reference to a public static data member (hHighCustData) on the sample class
type, r-CustObjStatic:

    MESSAGE "Number of buffers =" r-CustObjStatic:hHighCustData:NUM-BUFFERS
      VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.


This static data member is also a handle to a similar ProDataSet, and example code performs the same function as the
previous instance code without having to instantiate a class.

Notes
•   Using the appropriate syntax, you can read and write data as defined for the data member type.                                                                                                         
•   You can also read or write a .NET data member, depending on its definition. For example, if a given .NET data
    member is defined as a constant, you can only read the defined value of that data member, but you cannot write to
    it. .NET data members can also be defined with a variable value as read-only. For information on the definition of
    a .NET data member, see its entry in the class library documentation. 
•   If the data member is defined as static, you can access the data member using static type-name syntax whether or
    not an instance of its defining class exists.
•   ABL implicitly defines the default buffers of any database tables you reference within a class definition as private
    instance data members of the class.
•   If you reference an available data member within a static constructor, static method, static property accessor, or as
    part of another static data member definition that is defined in the same class or class hierarchy as the referenced
    member (such as referencing a buffer in a static data-source definition), the referenced data member must also be
    defined as static; attempting to directly reference an instance data member that is defined in the same class or class
    hierarchy as the referencing static member raises a compile-time error. To reference a buffer for a database table in
    a static data member definition, you must define and reference an alternate static buffer data member for the table
    with a compatible access mode.
•   If a data member definition includes a reference to another data member defined in the same class, the access mode
    of the referenced data member must be no less restrictive than the access mode of the data member definition where
    it is referenced. For example, if a data-source is defined with a PROTECTED access mode, any buffer that it references
    must be defined as either PROTECTED or PUBLIC.
•   From within an ABL class definition, you can reference any data member that is both defined and available within
    the class hierarchy using its data-member-name without a qualifying object-reference (for instance, data members)
    or class-type-name (for static data members). Data members that you can reference directly by data-member-name
    within the class hierarchy where they are defined include:
    •   Class-based variables (and their associated visual widgets). You can use the THIS-OBJECT system reference
        as an object-reference to access any available instance variable data member that is defined within
        the class hierarchy. However, you must use THIS-OBJECT to access any instance variable data member whose
        name is a reserved keyword. You can also use class-type-name to access any available static variable data member
        that is defined within the class hierarchy. However, you must use class-type-name to access any static variable
        data member whose name is a reserved keyword.
•   Streams, work-tables, and widgets, including browses, buttons, frames, images, menus, sub-menus, and rectangles
    that you define in a class block are not data members. Like triggers, these are class-scoped resources that are privately
    available for use with both instance and static members within the defining class.
•   From within a class hierarchy where static data members are defined, you can use a qualifying class-type-name to
    access only the static variable data members from both ABL and .NET, including the elements of arrays. To access
    all other static data members (such as temp-tables or buffers) defined in the current class hierarchy, you must only
    use an unqualified data-member-name.
•   From outside a class hierarchy, you must reference any available instance data member using its data-member-name
    qualified by an object-reference to the class instance where the data member is defined, and you must reference any
    available static data member using the class-type-name of the class where the data member is defined as static. The
    only data members that are available outside the class hierarchy where they are defined are variables defined as
    PUBLIC (and any associated visual widgets for instance variables), including the elements of arrays.
    Note: From outside the class hierarchy where they are defined, you cannot apply events (using the APPLY statement)
    to triggers defined for widgets associated with PUBLIC data members.


Class-based method call
   Invokes a method of a class. If the method returns a value, the method call can appear anywhere that an expression can
   appear, and it can also appear as a single statement, ignoring the return value. If the method is VOID (does not return a
   value), the method call must appear as a single statement.

   Syntax

     [ { class-type-name | object-reference } : ]
       method-name ( [ parameter [ , parameter ] ... ] ) [ NO-ERROR ]


   class-type-name
               The name of an ABL or .NET class type that defines the specified method as a static member. The
               use of class-type-name to call a static method is optional when you call the method from within the
               class hierarchy where it is defined. For more information, see the notes for this reference entry. You
               cannot use class-type-name to call an instance method. For more information on specifying class
               (object) type names, see the Type-name syntax on page 1011 reference entry. You can use the unqualified
               class name with the presence of an appropriate USING statement on page 1035.
   object-reference
               Specifies a reference to an ABL or .NET class instance (an object) that defines the specified method
               as an instance member. The use of object-reference to call an instance method is optional when you
               call the method from within the class hierarchy where it is defined. For more information, see the notes
               for this reference entry. You cannot use object-reference to call a static method. For information on
               specifying object references, see the reference entry for a Class-based object reference on page 127.
   method-name
            Specifies the name of an ABL or .NET class method you want to call. A class method is a named
            block of ABL or .NET code, similar to a procedure or user-defined function, that is defined in a class.
            An instance method is available for an instance of the class for as long as the class instance exists. A
            static method is available for the defining class type during the entire ABL session, regardless if an
            instance of the class exists. A class method is available inside or outside of the class hierarchy depending
            on its access mode.
   ( [ parameter [ , parameter ] ... ] )
              Specifies zero or more parameters passed to the method. You must provide the parameters identified
              by the specified method, matched with respect to number, data type, and mode. To invoke a method
              that is overloaded in the class, you must specify sufficient information for each parameter in order to
              disambiguate methods that have similar parameter lists. Otherwise, the AVM raises an error identifying
              the ambiguity.
               For more information on parameter passing syntax and on disambiguating overloaded ABL and .NET
               methods, see the Parameter passing syntax on page 783 reference entry.
   NO-ERROR
               The NO-ERROR option on page 726 is used to prevent the statement from raising ERROR and displaying
               error messages.

Examples
The following code fragment shows a call to a public instance method (SetHighCustomerData( )) on an instance
of the sample class, r-CustObj:

    DEFINE VARIABLE rObj AS CLASS r-CustObj NO-UNDO.
    rObj = NEW r-CustObj( ) NO-ERROR.

    rObj:SetHighCustomerData( ) NO-ERROR.


This instance method initializes instance data for the class.
The following code fragment shows a call to a public static method (SetHighCustomerData( )) on the sample
class type, r-CustObjStatic:

    r-CustObjStatic:SetHighCustomerData( ) NO-ERROR.


This static method initializes class static data without having to instantiate the class, as in the previous instance code.
For more information on these methods and the sample classes in which they are defined, see the examples in the CLASS
statement on page 132 reference entry.

Notes
•   Using the appropriate syntax, you can invoke the method as a statement (without returning a value) or invoke the
    method in an expression that uses the defined return value according to its data type. For information on ABL methods
    and their definition, see the METHOD statement on page 702 reference entry. For information on the definition of a
    .NET method, see its entry in the class library documentation. For information on how .NET data types map to ABL
    data types, see the Data types on page 258 reference entry.
•   If the method is defined as static, you can call the method whether or not an instance of its defining class exists.
•   If you reference an available method within a static constructor, static method, or static property accessor that is
    defined in the same class or class hierarchy as the referenced method, the referenced method must also be defined
    as static; attempting to directly reference an instance method that is defined in the same class or class hierarchy as
    the referencing static member raises a compile-time error.
•   From within an ABL class definition, you can typically invoke any instance method that is defined and available
    within the class hierarchy by referencing its method-name and any parameter list without a qualifying object-reference.
    However, if the method name is a reserved keyword, you must call the method using THIS-OBJECT as the
    object-reference. If the instance method is defined as an OVERRIDE method, you can invoke the method
    implementation that it overrides in the most derived class where it is defined using SUPER as the object-reference.
    For more information, see the reference entry for the SUPER system reference on page 977.
•   From within a class definition, you can typically invoke any static method that is defined and available within the
    class hierarchy by referencing its method-name and any parameter list without a qualifying class-type-name. However,
    if the method name is a reserved keyword, you must call the method using the qualifying class-type-name, even if
    the method is called from within the class that defines it. If the static method is defined as an OVERRIDE (redefining)
    method, you can invoke any static method implementation in the class hierarchy that it redefines by using the
    qualifying class-type-name of the class that defines the particular method implementation you want to call.
•   From outside a class hierarchy, you can only invoke an available instance method by referencing its method-name
    and its parameters qualified by an object-reference to the class instance where the method is defined; you can only
    invoke an available static method by referencing its method-name and its parameters qualified by the class-type-name
    of the class that defines the method as static.
•   A method marked as PRIVATE can be accessed from any instance of the class that defines it. A PACKAGE-PRIVATE
    method can be accessed from any instance of the class that defines it or any class in the same package. A PROTECTED
    method can be accessed from any instance of the class that defines it or a subclass of the defining class. A
    PACKAGE-PROTECTED method can be accessed from any instance of the class that defines it, a subclass of the
       defining class (which may be in different packages), or any class in the same package. A PUBLIC method can be
       accessed from any class (whether in the same package or another package), or from a procedure file.
   •   You can call an abstract method either from within the class that defines it or on an object-reference defined as the
       type of the abstract class that defines it. Although an abstract method is defined without an implementation, at run
       time, the method is always implemented in a derived class. So, any reference to an abstract method is always resolved
       by the most derived class that implements it.
   •   ABL has the following limitations on the .NET methods you can call:
       •     You cannot call the static method, System.Windows.Forms.Application:DoEvent( ). In ABL,
             you can use the PROCESS EVENTS statement on page 808 to handle both ABL and .NET events.
       •     You cannot call the static method, System.Windows.Forms.Application:Run( ), outside of a
             WAIT-FOR statement. For more information, see the WAIT-FOR statement (.NET and ABL) on page 1055
             reference entry.
       •     You cannot call the instance method, System.Windows.Forms.Form:ShowDialog( ), outside of a
             WAIT-FOR statement. For more information, see the WAIT-FOR statement (.NET and ABL) on page 1055
             reference entry.
       •     You cannot call a .NET generic method. Similar to a .NET generic type, a .NET generic method has a name that
             is appended with a comma-separated list of one or more type parameters enclosed in angle brackets, for example,
             Add<T, S>(tVar, sVar). In this case, you would substitute .NET data types for the parameters T and S
             when you called the method. ABL does not currently support any reference to these methods. For more information
             on ABL support for .NET generic types, see the Data types on page 258 reference entry.


   

Class-based object reference
   References an instance of an ABL or .NET class and provides access to instance class members (per the restrictions of
   the access levels assigned to the members).

   Syntax

       object-reference [ [ key ] ] [ : {                        data-member
                                                                   | property
                                                                   | method
                                                            }
                                                     ]


   object-reference
               Specifies a reference to an instance of a class (an object). This can be a variable (data member),
               property, data member or property array element, handle attribute (such as FIRST-OBJECT), method
               return value, ABL function return, or user-defined function return value defined for an ABL or .NET
               object type. It also can be an appropriately-used system reference, such as SUPER or THIS-OBJECT.
               Its value references an instance of a specified class (class-based object). If it is for a class, the data
               type of the value can be for the class type itself or for a super class of the referenced class. If it is for
               an interface, its value can reference an instance of any class that implements that interface.
   [ key ]
                 Specifies an indexer for the default indexed property of a .NET class. The brackets are a required part
                 of the syntax.

            The key value is an index value of any supported .NET data type that identifies the property value you
            want to reference. If this value is an object reference, you can also use it to access any public instance
            data-member, property, or method on the .NET class instance that the property references. For more
            information, see the reference entry for a Class-based property access on page 129.
            Note: ABL also allows you to access the default indexed property of a class by specifying the indexer
            on the default property name. There is no functional difference between specifying the indexer directly
            on the object reference and specifying it on the property name. For more information on accessing
            .NET indexed properties, see the Class-based property access on page 129 reference entry.
data-member
         Specifies the name of a PUBLIC instance variable defined in the specified ABL class or of a public
         instance field defined in the specified .NET class. The value of the ABL variable data member can be
         written or read for the class instance referenced by object-reference. The value of a .NET field can be
         read or written for the class instance specified by object-reference, unless it is defined as a constant
         (using the C# const keyword). If it is a constant, it can only be read. For more information, see the
         reference entry for a Class-based data member access on page 122.
property
            Specifies the name of a PUBLIC instance property defined in the specified ABL or .NET class. The
            value of this property can be written or read for the class instance referenced by object-reference,
            depending on the property definition. For more information, see the reference entry for a Class-based
            property access on page 129.
method
            Specifies the name and any run-time parameters taken by a PUBLIC instance method defined in the
            specified ABL or .NET class, or a call to a built-in event method. A class method can provide a value,
            depending on the method definition. For more information on calling class methods, see the reference
            entry for a Class-based method call on page 125. For more information on the built-in event methods,
            see the Class Events Reference.

Notes
•   You can obtain an object reference for a .NET object in the same way you can obtain a reference to any ABL
    class-based object, by creating a new object or obtaining the reference to an existing one. You cannot create or
    reference instances of the following .NET classes:
    •   Classes defined in the .NET default namespace (that is, classes with no namespace defined)
    •   System.Threading.Thread or any class derived from it
    •   System.Delegate or any delegate type derived from it
•   If the documentation for a .NET class includes a member in a list of "Explicit Interface Implementations", you cannot
    access that member on an object reference defined as the class type. You can only access that member on an object
    reference that is defined as (or cast to) a particular interface that defines the method. Thus, ABL documentation
    refers to such a .NET class member as an explicit interface member.
•   You cannot define or otherwise obtain an object reference to a .NET mapped object type (for example,
    System.Int32), except when overriding a .NET method or when implementing a method or property of a .NET
    interface. You can only access instances of .NET mapped object types as corresponding ABL primitive types (for
    example, INTEGER). For more information, see the Data types on page 258 reference entry. However, you can access
    .NET static properties and methods on their defining .NET mapped object types.
•   ABL classes do not currently support default or indexed properties. So, you cannot reference an ABL class instance
    using an indexer for a default indexed property.





Class-based property access
   References a property of a class in order to read or write its value.

   Syntax

     [ [ class-type-name | object-reference ] : ]
       property-name [ [ index | key ] ]


   class-type-name
               The name of an ABL or .NET object type that defines the specified property as a static member. The
               use of class-type-name to access a static property is optional when you access the property from within
               the class hierarchy where it is defined. For more information, see the notes for this reference entry.
               You cannot use class-type-name to access an instance property. For more information on specifying
               object type names, see the Type-name syntax on page 1011 reference entry. You can use the unqualified
               class name with the presence of an appropriate USING statement on page 1035.
   object-reference
               Specifies a reference to an instance of an ABL or .NET class (an object) that defines the specified
               property as an instance member. The use of object-reference to access an instance property is optional
               when you access the property from within the class hierarchy where it is defined. For more information,
               see the notes for this reference entry. You cannot use object-reference to access a static property. For
               information on specifying object references, see the reference entry for a Class-based object reference
               on page 127.
   property-name
              The name of an ABL or .NET property. Accessing a property is similar to accessing a variable data
              member. Also, like a data member, a property is defined in, and at, the level of a class definition. If it
              is an instance property, a separate copy exists for each instance of its defining class, for as long as the
              class instance exists. If it is a static property, only one copy exists for the defining class type during
              the entire ABL session, regardless if any instance of the class exists. A property is available inside or
              outside of the class hierarchy depending on its access mode. If and how a property can be read or
              written depends on a combination of its access mode and associated behavior defined for the property.
              For more information on ABL property definitions, see the DEFINE PROPERTY statement on page
              370 reference entry. For information on the definition of a .NET property, see its entry in the class
              library documentation.
   [ index|key ]
               An index specifies an index into an ABL array property. A key specifies an indexer for a .NET indexed
               property. The brackets are a required part of the syntax.
               If an array index is specified, it can be an integer value that identifies an element of an ABL array
               property, similar to an element of an ABL array data member (see the Class-based data member access
               on page 122 reference entry).
               If a key for a .NET property indexer is specified, it can be a value of any supported .NET data type
               that identifies the property value to reference. A .NET indexed property represents a group of properties,
               where the key is a value that indicates what member of the group is being referenced. A .NET indexed
               property can have more than one type of indexer that is overloaded according to the data type of its
               key, similar to a method that is overloaded by a single parameter. However, you cannot specify an AS
               data type with the key in order to identify a particular .NET indexer overload, as you can with a .NET
               method parameter. Also, some .NET
               indexed properties have indexers with multiple key values, each with its own data type. However,
               ABL only supports .NET indexed properties that have single-key indexers. So, you might be able to
               use some indexers for a property and not be able to use others.


            Thus, ABL only recognizes a .NET property indexer if the property has a single-key indexer. If so,
            ABL selects the indexer using the ABL data type that you specify for the key, in order by the following
            criteria:
            1. If the .NET data type of an indexer key is the default match for the specified ABL data type, ABL
               uses that key.
            2. If there is no .NET indexer key that is a default match for the specified ABL data type, ABL uses
               the first key that it encounters where the .NET data type is an implicit data type mapping for the
               specified ABL data type.
            For more information on how ABL data types map to .NET data types, see the Data types on page 258
            reference entry.
            For example, if you specify an ABL INTEGER value for the key, and the indexer is overloaded by
            .NET System.Double, System.Byte, and System.Int32 keys, ABL uses the
            System.Int32key to index the property. If the available overloadings are System.Double,
            System.Byte, and System.Int16, ABL uses either the System.Byte or the
            System.Int16key, which ever is encountered first.
            ABL classes do not currently support the definition of indexed properties. So, you cannot access ABL
            properties using an indexer.

Examples
The following code fragment shows a reference to a public instance property (HighCustBalance) on an instance of
the sample class, r-CustObj:

    DEFINE VARIABLE rObj AS CLASS r-CustObj NO-UNDO.
    rObj = NEW r-CustObj( ) NO-ERROR.

    MESSAGE "High customer balance =" rObj:HighCustBalance
      VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.


Once initialized, this instance property returns the highest balance for all Customer records in the Sports2020
database.
The following code fragment shows a reference to a public static property (HighCustBalance) on the sample class
type, r-CustObjStatic:

    MESSAGE "High customer balance =" r-CustObjStatic:HighCustBalance
      VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.


This static property similarly returns the highest balance for all Customer records in the Sports2020 database
without having to instantiate the class, as in the previous instance code.
For more information on these properties and the sample classes in which they are defined, see the examples in the
CLASS statement on page 132 reference entry.

Notes
•   Using the appropriate property syntax, if the property is defined as both readable and writable, you can assign and
    otherwise read and write the value of a property in the same way as a variable data member of the same data type.
    If the property is read-only, you can only read the property value; if the property is write-only, you can only write
    a value to the property. For information on how .NET data types map to ABL data types when using .NET properties,
    see the Data types on page 258 reference entry.
•   When and how the value of a property can be read or written depends on the definition of special methods (accessors)
    that execute during property access. Note that even though the value written to a property appears to
    its SET accessor like a method parameter, the compatibility between the data type of the written value and the data
    type of the property follows the same rules as the assignment of data types for variables or data members. In other
    words, ABL attempts to identify an appropriate conversion when you assign a value to a property. In C#
    documentation, the presence of a get accessor in the property signature means that the property is readable; the
    presence of a set accessor in the property signature means that the property is writable. For example, the signature
    of the .NET HelpButton property indicates that it is both readable and writable, because it shows both a get and
    a set accessor:

      public bool HelpButton { get; set; }


•   If the property is defined as static, you can access the property whether or not an instance of its defining class exists.
    This is done by qualifying the property name with the class-type-name.
•   If you reference an available property within a static constructor, static method, or static property accessor that is
    defined in the same class or class hierarchy as the referenced property, the referenced property must also be defined
    as static; attempting to reference an instance property that is defined in the same class or class hierarchy as a referencing
    static member raises a compile-time error.
•   In ABL, access modes are enforced at the class level. This means that if a class type has access to a class member,
    that member can be referenced via any instance of the class when done so from within the class implementation.
•   From within an ABL class definition, you can reference any property that is both defined and available within the
    class hierarchy using its property-name without a qualifying object-reference or class-type-name (for static properties).
    Optionally, you can use the THIS-OBJECT system reference on page 997 as an object-reference to access any available
    instance property defined within the class hierarchy. If the property name is a reserved keyword, you must reference
    the property by qualifying the name with either its class-type-name or THIS-OBJECT as the object-reference. 
•   From outside a class hierarchy, you must reference any available property using its property-name qualified by an
    object-reference.
•   You can access an abstract property either from within the class that defines it or on an object-reference. defined as
    the type of the abstract class that defines it. Although an abstract property is defined without an implementation, at
    run time, the property is always implemented in a derived class. So, any reference to an abstract property is always
    resolved by the derived class that implements it.
•   When you access an ABL property from within its own definition (from an accessor), this access either directly
    accesses the property's default memory or invokes an accessor, depending on whether you are reading or writing the
    property and which accessor you are accessing the property from. 
•   .NET indexed properties can be overloaded only by the indexer, and ABL identifies the overloading to use only by
    the definition of its indexer. Each overloading of an indexed property can specify a different access mode (for
    example, private or public) and can have different accessor method definitions. For example, one overloading of a
    property might be read-only and another overloading of the property might be write-only. In general, all overloadings
    of an indexed property share the same property data type. However, the data type of the index key does not have to
    match the data type of the property.
•   A .NET class can have a default indexed property. By convention, most default indexed properties in .NET are named
    Item. Like some .NET languages, ABL allows you to access the default indexed property by its name, like any
    other property. However, ABL also allows you to access the default indexed property of a class by specifying the
    indexer directly on object-reference, omitting the property name. For example, the .NET System.Data.DataView class defines a default Item
   property that returns a .NET DataRow given a record index. In ABL, therefore, the following indexed object
       references to a DataView class instance are identical:

         DEFINE    VARIABLE rDataView AS CLASS System.Data.DataView.
         DEFINE    VARIABLE rRow      AS CLASS System.Data.DataRow.
         . . .
         rRow =    rDataView[2].
         rRow =    rDataView:Item[2].


       In .NET, the most common use of a default indexed property is to access an instance of a class from a collection.
       Two examples are the .NET System.Data.DataTableCollection and the System.Data.DataRow
       classes. For more information on working with .NET collections in ABL, see Use .NET Classes in ABL Applications.
   •   When you access a property, the property accessor can raise the ERROR condition on the statement that accesses
       the property. If this statement is defined with the NO-ERROR option, you can locate the property error information
       using the ERROR-STATUS system handle following statement execution, and you can read any returned error string
       using the RETURN-VALUE function on page 891. Alternatively, you can catch the property error object using a
       CATCH statement on page 113 in the block that executes the statement. To access more comprehensive error
       information for a .NET exception, use a CATCH statement instead of the NO-ERROR option to handle .NET
       exceptions raised from accessing .NET properties. For more information on handling .NET exceptions, see the
       sections on .NET error handling in Use .NET Classes in ABL Applications.

   
CLASS statement
   Defines a user-defined class. A class defined with this statement represents a user-defined data type whose characteristics
   are defined by class members, including a set of class data members and properties that define class data, and a set of
   class methods and events that define class behavior. In addition to class members, a class definition can include special
   optional methods (one or more constructors and one destructor). It can also include class-scoped handle-based objects
   that provide private resources to the class, function prototypes for user-defined functions referenced by the class, and
   triggers to handle events for widgets and other handle-based objects defined by the class.
   You can instantiate a non-abstract class as an object using the NEW function (classes), NEW statement
   , the New( ) method of the Progress.Lang.Class class, or the DYNAMIC-NEW statement. Instantiating
   a class returns an object reference that provides access to instance members of the class. You can also access static
   members of a class without instantiating the class.
   Note: This statement is applicable only when used in a class definition (.cls) file. For more information, see the Notes
   section in this reference entry.

   Syntax

       CLASS class-type-name [ INHERITS super-type-name]
         [ IMPLEMENTS interface-type-name [ , interface-type-name ] ... ]
         [ USE-WIDGET-POOL ]
         [ ABSTRACT | FINAL ]
         [ SERIALIZABLE ]:
         class-body


   class-type-name
               Defines the type name for a user-defined class type. Specify an ABL class type name as described in
               the Type-name syntax on page 1011 reference entry. You can also specify an unqualified class name
           (without a package), but only if the class name represents the full type name for the class (that is, the
           class is not defined as part of a package).
           Note that you cannot specify Progress as the first component of the package name for any ABL
           user-defined class. For example, Progress.Inventory.UpdateInv is an invalid type name
           for a user-defined class and results in a compiler error.
           The value of class-type-name is restricted to alphanumeric characters plus the symbols #, $, %, and
           _.
INHERITS super-type-name
        Optionally specifies the type name of a super class whose state and behavioral characteristics this
        user-defined class inherits. The new class becomes a subclass (derived class) of the specified super
        class and of every other super class in its class hierarchy. The super-type-name you specify can be an
        ABL or .NET class type name as described in the Type-name syntax on page 1011 reference entry. With
        an appropriate USING statement on page 1035, you can also specify an unqualified class name (a class
        name without the ABL package or .NET namespace that completes the class type name).
           If super-type-name is an abstract class, in this class definition you must implement all the abstract
           members (properties, methods, and events) that you inherit unless you also define this class as abstract.
           The following files must be found at compile time:
           •   For an ABL super class, the class definition (.cls) file.
           •   For a .NET super class, the assembly that contains the .NET class definition. OpenEdge places
               restrictions on the .NET classes you can inherit. For more information on the compilation
               requirements for inheriting .NET classes, see the Notes of this reference entry.
           By default, a class definition inherits directly from the built-in ABL root class,
           Progress.Lang.Object. If you inherit from a .NET class, its .NET root class, System.Object,
           also inherits directly from Progress.Lang.Object.
IMPLEMENTS interface-type-name [ , interface-type-name]...
       Optionally specifies the type name of one or more interfaces the new class implements. The new class
       must implement all properties and methods defined in the specified interfaces. Specify
       interface-type-name as an ABL or .NET interface type name as described in the Type-name syntax. With an appropriate USING statement, you can also specify
       an unqualified interface name (an interface name without the ABL package or .NET namespace that
       completes the interface type name). The value of interface-type-name is restricted to alphanumeric
       characters plus the symbols #, $, %, and _.
           For each interface that you implement, your class must implement all the properties, methods, and
           class events defined by the interface. If any super class in the hierarchy implements a property, method,
           or event defined by a specified interface-type-name, this satisfies the requirement to implement that
           property, method, or event in your class.
           If multiple implemented interfaces define an identical member, they all share the same implementation
           of that member. Thus, ABL classes do not support .NET explicit interface members.
           ABL must find the following files at compile time:
           •   For an ABL interface, the class definition (.cls) file that contains the interface definition. For
               more information on defining an ABL interface, see the INTERFACE statement on page 644
               reference entry.
           •   For a .NET interface, the assembly that contains the .NET interface definition. OpenEdge places
               restrictions on the .NET interfaces you can implement. For more information on the compilation
               requirements for implementing .NET interfaces, see the Notes of this reference entry.
USE-WIDGET-POOL
       Directs the AVM to create an unnamed widget pool that is scoped to the class hierarchy of each instance
       of the class. When specified, all dynamic handle-based objects that are created in the class by and for
       instance class members are created by default in this unnamed widget pool. If the class contains static
           members, this option directs the AVM to create a separate unnamed widget pool that is scoped to the
           class for all dynamic handle-based objects created for or by these static class members in the session.
           If methods or externally invoked procedures create their own unnamed widget pools, dynamic
           handle-based objects are created in the most locally scoped unnamed widget pool, regardless of this
           option. If no unnamed widget pools are created, either for the class (no USE-WIDGET-POOL option
           specified) or within any invoked procedure or method, all dynamic objects are created by default in
           the session unnamed widget pool both for instance and static members.
           Note: When you define an unnamed widget pool in a method or external procedure, it is scoped to
           that method or procedure. You can delete the widget pool within the method or procedure using the
           DELETE WIDGET-POOL statement, or let the AVM delete the widget pool when the method or
           procedure ends.
           Within an instantiated class, any class in the class hierarchy that specifies the USE-WIDGET-POOL
           directs the AVM to create one unnamed widget pool that all classes in the class hierarchy share. The
           AVM deletes this unnamed widget pool when the class instance is deleted (destroyed).
           You can also define a named widget pool in a class definition file. If you define a named widget pool,
           object instances are created in that widget pool only if you explicitly reference the widget pool by
           name.
           
ABSTRACT
       Defines the class as abstract. An abstract class allows you to define any number of instance property,
       method, or event members, as abstract. Abstract members are prototypes, similar to interface members,
       without an implementation. Abstract members must be implemented by a derived class to provide data
       or behavior, but they also function polymorphically in the class hierarchy wherever they are still
       defined as abstract. So, for example, an abstract property can be accessed or an abstract method can
       be called and the result depends on its implementation further down in the class hierarchy. Also,
       whether or not an abstract class defines abstract members, it must be inherited by a derived class. Thus,
       you cannot directly instantiate an abstract class or define an abstract class as FINAL.
           An abstract class can inherit from another abstract class or a non-abstract class, and it can redefine
           any implemented methods that it inherits as abstract. However, it cannot redefine any implemented
           properties or events that it inherits as abstract. Any redefined abstract methods must, again, be
           implemented in a derived class.
           If a non-abstract class inherits from an abstract class, it must implement all of the inherited abstract
           members that are not already implemented in the abstract class hierarchy. An abstract class can contain
           implemented class members, either exclusively or in addition to abstract members. If an immediate
           subclass of an abstract class does not implement all of its inherited abstract members, the immediate
           subclass must also be defined as abstract, and a further derived class must implement the remaining
           abstract members.
FINAL
           Indicates the class cannot be inherited by another class. That is, it cannot be used in the INHERITS
           phrase in another class definition. Thus, a FINAL class cannot also be defined as ABSTRACT. Define
           a class as FINAL when you do not want any of its state or behavior overridden.
SERIALIZABLE
        Indicates that object instances of the class can be:
           •   serialized to a binary or JSON stream
           •   passed between an application server and a remote ABL client.
           For a class to be serializable, all classes in the hierarchy must be marked as SERIALIZABLE, so using
           this option on a class that inherits from a non-serializable class will raise a compile-time error. The
  class types of any data members that are themselves class-based objects must also be SERIALIZABLE.
             The SERIALIZABLE option cannot be used with ABL-extended .NET classes.
             When serializing an object to a JSON stream, the individual data members, properties, temp-tables,
             and ProDataSets of the class may also need to be defined as SERIALIZABLE themselves to participate
             in serialization. 
             The conditions an object must satisfy to be passed between an application server and an ABL client
             are detailed in the Parameter passing syntax. The conditions an object must satisfy
             to be serialized to a stream are found in the relevant Serialize( ) method entries, depending on
             the stream format.
class-body
             The body of a class definition is composed of the following types of elements:
             •   Data members — Class members that define instance or static data (or the state) for the class
             •   Properties — Class members that define instance or static data, similar to data members, but with
                 the option of associated behavior
             •   Methods — Class members that define instance or static behavior for the class
             •   Class events — Class members that define instance or static events for the class
             •   Constructors — Special methods that define initialization for the class, at least one of which is
                 invoked for the class when an instance (object) is created, and a separate one of which is invoked
                 the first time a class with static members is referenced
             •   Destructor — A special method that defines finalization behavior and that is invoked when the
                 AVM deletes the object using garbage collection or when you delete the object explicitly
             •   Class-scoped handle-based objects — Handle-based objects that are not class members, but can
                 be defined in and privately scoped to provide certain resources to the class
             •   Triggers — ON statements, which are not class members, but can be defined in the class to handle
                 events on class-scoped and other handle-based objects
             •   User-defined function prototypes — FUNCTION statements that are not class members but
                 declare external user-defined functions referenced by the class
             You can define these elements in any order. Only elements that are listed as class members contribute
             to the type definition of a class. The remaining elements provide weakly typed resources that are
             privately available to the class definition.
             Define elements in the class body using the following syntax:

                 [   data-member-definitions ]
                 [   property-definitions ]
                 [   method-definitions ]
                 [   event-definitions ]
                 [   constructor-definitions ]
                 [   destructor-definition ]
                 [   class-scoped-definitions ]
                 [   trigger-definitions ]
                 [   udf-prototype-definitions ]

                 END [ CLASS ].


             data-member-definitions
             Defines one or more data members of the class. The following table lists the types of data members
             you can define and their associated ABL DEFINE statement. Data members can be defined as instance
             or static members. An instance data member is scoped to a particular class instance, while a static data
             member is scoped to the duration of the ABL session.
                                                                                           

Table 13: Class data member types

Data member type                  ABL DEFINE statement
BUFFER object                     DEFINE BUFFER statement on page 315
Class-based object                DEFINE VARIABLE statement on page 412 (with the AS
                                  CLASS option, defines a variable as an object reference to a
                                  class or interface type)
DATASET object                    DEFINE DATASET statement on page 326
DATA-SOURCE object                DEFINE DATA-SOURCE statement on page 333
HANDLE                            DEFINE VARIABLE statement on page 412 (a primitive type
                                  that can reference a handle-based object)
Primitive type                    DEFINE VARIABLE statement on page 412 (for example,
                                  INTEGER or HANDLE)
QUERY object                      DEFINE QUERY statement on page 386
TEMP-TABLE object                 DEFINE TEMP-TABLE statement on page 402


Note: If the data member is defined in a class that is derived from a .NET class, ABL imposes specific
restrictions on the available names you can use to define data members. For more information, see the
Notes of this reference entry.

property-definitions
Defines one or more instance or static property members of the class. If the class is abstract, an instance
property can also be defined as abstract. Properties are similar to data members with the addition of
behavioral and associated access control options. Like data members, an instance property is scoped
to a particular class instance, while a static property is scoped to the duration of the ABL session. For
more information on defining properties, see the DEFINE PROPERTY statement on page 370 reference
entry. For more information on accessing properties, see the Class-based property access on page 129
reference entry.
Note: If the property is defined in a class that is derived from a .NET class, ABL imposes specific
restrictions on the available names you can use to define properties. For more information, see the
Notes of this reference entry.

method-definitions
Defines one or more instance or static method members of the class. If the class is abstract, an instance
method can also be defined as abstract. A method is a named, callable block of ABL code that can
return a value and that you can invoke like a procedure or a user-defined function (when it returns a
value). You can define multiple overloaded methods with the same name, but with different parameter
lists, and you can define a method that overrides or redefines a method of the same name and signature
that is defined in a super class. Like data members and properties, an instance method is scoped to a
particular class instance and a static method is scoped to the duration of the ABL session.

Note: If the method is defined in a class that is derived from a .NET class, ABL imposes specific
restrictions on the available method names you can use to define methods. For more information, see
the Notes of this reference entry.

event-definitions                                                                                            
Defines one or more instance or static event members of the class (class events). If the class is abstract,
an instance event can also be defined as abstract. A class event allows the defining class to send
notifications that some condition has been identified. Like data members, properties, and methods, an
instance event is scoped to a particular class instance and a static event is scoped to the duration of
the ABL session. 

constructor-definitions
Defines one or more constructors for the class. Only one such constructor can be defined as static. An
instance constructor is a special method that ABL invokes to initialize data for a new class instance
when the object is instantiated using the NEW function (classes), NEW statement , or DYNAMIC-NEW statement. You can define multiple instance constructors
distinguished (overloaded) by different parameter lists. You cannot invoke an instance constructor
directly except from within the body of another constructor. If you do not define an instance constructor,
ABL provides a default instance constructor that takes no parameters. A static constructor is a special
method that ABL invokes to initialize static members defined by the class. You can define one static
constructor that ABL invokes on the first reference to a class. If you do not define a static constructor,
ABL provides a default static constructor. 

destructor-definition
Defines a destructor for the class. You can define only one destructor for a class. ABL invokes this
destructor when the an instance of the class is deleted, either automatically during garbage collection
or manually using the DELETE OBJECT statement. You cannot invoke a destructor directly. If not
defined, ABL provides a default destructor.

class-scoped-definitions
Defines class-scoped handle-based objects that are not data members, but provide certain resources
that are privately scoped to the class definition. These resources include the statically defined widgets
that support the OpenEdge GUI and certain statically defined handle-based objects, all of which are
listed in the following table.
Table 14: Class-scoped handle-based objects

Data member type                  ABL DEFINE statement
BROWSE widget                     DEFINE BROWSE statement on page 304
BUTTON widget                     DEFINE BUTTON statement on page 320
Data stream object                DEFINE STREAM statement on page 395
FRAME widget                      DEFINE FRAME statement on page 340
IMAGE widget                      DEFINE IMAGE statement on page 350
MENU widget                       DEFINE MENU statement on page 353
RECTANGLE widget                  DEFINE RECTANGLE statement on page 391
SUB-MENU widget                   DEFINE SUB-MENU statement on page 397
WORK-TABLE object                 DEFINE WORK-TABLE statement on page 424


trigger-definitions

            Defines one or more ON statements that specify triggers for events on certain handle-based objects,
            which can include some of the class-scoped objects listed in the pr. 
udf-prototype-definitions
            Declares user-defined function prototypes for functions that are defined external to the class but
            referenced by methods and triggers defined in the class. 

END [ CLASS ]
            Specifies the end of the class body definition. You must end the class body definition with the END
            statement.

Examples
The following samples include three different sets of class and procedure definitions that provide similar functionality
in different ways. Each class defines or inherits a ProDataSet data member (dsHighCustData) and a public class
method (SetHighCustomerData( )) that populates the ProDataSet with selected fields in the Sports2020
database from both a Customer record and related Invoice records, where the Customer has the highest recorded
balance in the database and also has related invoices. Each implementation of SetHighCustomerData( ) also sets
two public properties defined by its class (HighCustBalance and HighCustNum) to the highest database value
for Customer.Balance and Customer.CustNum, and publishes a public class event defined by its class for each
Customer record it encounters with related Invoice records. Each class defines or inherits additional data members
to support its own instance of dsHighCustData, and also defines or inherits a public method
(GetHighCustomerData( )) that returns dsHighCustData as an output parameter.
Each of the following sample class files or sets of class files implement this functionality:
1. r-CustObj.cls — Using instance members of an r-CustObj ABL class instance
2. r-CustObjStatic.cls — Using static members of the r-CustObjStatic ABL class type
3. r-CustObjAbstractImpl.cls and r-CustObjAbstract.cls — Using instance members of an
   r-CustObjAbstractImpl ABL class instance, some of which are abstract members inherited from the
   r-CustObjAbstract ABL abstract class
Each class or set of classes has an associated sample procedure that accesses the respective class and implements a
similar application to display data stored by the class.
The following r-CustObj.cls sample class file shows many of the basic features of an ABL class definition. It
defines only instance members and is defined as FINAL, meaning that it cannot be inherited by a subclass. This class
sample also implicitly inherits from Progress.Lang.Object.
In this class, most of the data members, including the dsHighCustData ProDataSet and its supporting temp-tables,
query, and data-sources, are defined as private, allowing access to its data primarily through its public properties and
methods. However to demonstrate a public data member, the handle variable for dsHighCustData is defined as
public. The class constructor attaches these data sources to the ProDataSet temp-table buffers and sets the handle variable
(hHighCustData) for reference by the SetHighCustomerData( ) method to fill and refill the ProDataSet. (An
application might need to call this method multiple times to refill the ProDataSet as database Customer.Balance
values change.)
                

r-CustObj.cls
                                                                  
CLASS r-CustObj FINAL:

  /* Public properties to return basic values for a customer with the
     highest balance */
  DEFINE PUBLIC PROPERTY HighCustBalance AS DECIMAL INITIAL 0.0 NO-UNDO
    GET.
    PRIVATE SET.
  DEFINE PUBLIC PROPERTY HighCustNum AS INTEGER INITIAL ? NO-UNDO
    GET.
    PRIVATE SET.

  /* Public event to notify about Customers with Invoices */
  DEFINE PUBLIC EVENT CustHasInvoices
    SIGNATURE VOID ( piCustNum AS INTEGER ).

  /* Public handle variable for the high customer ProDataSet */
  DEFINE PUBLIC VARIABLE hHighCustData AS HANDLE NO-UNDO.

  /* Private temp-tables for the high customer ProDataSet */
  DEFINE PRIVATE TEMP-TABLE ttCust NO-UNDO LIKE Customer.
  DEFINE PRIVATE TEMP-TABLE ttInv NO-UNDO LIKE Invoice.

  /* Private ProDataSet for a single customer with the highest
     balance and its invoices */
  DEFINE PRIVATE DATASET dsHighCustData FOR ttCust, ttInv
    DATA-RELATION FOR ttCust, ttInv
      RELATION-FIELDS (ttCust.CustNum, ttInv.CustNum).

  /* Private query and data sources for the ProDataSet */
  DEFINE PRIVATE QUERY qCust FOR Customer.
  DEFINE PRIVATE DATA-SOURCE srcCust FOR QUERY qCust.
  DEFINE PRIVATE DATA-SOURCE srcInv FOR Invoice.

  /* Constructor to initialize handles and attach data sources */
  CONSTRUCTOR r-CustObj ( ):
    hHighCustData = DATASET dsHighCustData:HANDLE.
    BUFFER ttCust:ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE( DATA-SOURCE srcCust:HANDLE ).
    BUFFER ttInv:ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE( DATA-SOURCE srcInv:HANDLE ).
  END CONSTRUCTOR.

/* Public method to get the current high customer data */
  METHOD PUBLIC VOID GetHighCustomerData
    ( OUTPUT DATASET dsHighCustData BIND ):
  END METHOD.

/* Public method to set (or reset) the current high customer data */
  METHOD PUBLIC VOID SetHighCustomerData ( ):
    hHighCustData:EMPTY-DATASET( ).
    FOR EACH Customer: /* Find Customer with highest balance */
      FIND FIRST Invoice WHERE Invoice.CustNum = Customer.CustNum NO-ERROR.
      IF AVAILABLE Invoice THEN DO:
         IF Customer.Balance > HighCustBalance THEN
           ASSIGN HighCustBalance = Customer.Balance
                   HighCustNum     = Customer.CustNum.
         CustHasInvoices:Publish( Customer.CustNum ).
      END.
    END.
    QUERY qCust:QUERY-PREPARE("FOR EACH Customer "
      + "WHERE Customer.CustNum = " + STRING(HighCustNum) ).
    hHighCustData:FILL( ).
  END METHOD.
 END CLASS.


To access the instance members of this class from outside its class definition, another class or procedure must instantiate
the class and assign its object reference to a property or variable whose data type is the instantiated class type, for
example:

  DEFINE VARIABLE rObj AS CLASS r-CustObj NO-UNDO.
  rObj = NEW r-CustObj( ) NO-ERROR.


This example uses the NEW statement on page 717 to instantiate the class. You can also use the NEW function (classes)
 or New( ) method in an appropriate expression, or the DYNAMIC-NEW statement. You can
then reference the public members of the class using the object reference, for example, calling a public instance method
of the class:

  rObj:SetHighCustomerData( ) NO-ERROR.


To access instance members of a class from within the class definition or a derived class, you can typically reference
the member without any prefix, like any local variable of a procedure or method. However, when the class member has
the name of a reserved keyword, you must prefix the reference with THIS-OBJECT. 
The following r-CustObjProc.p sample procedure file displays data from an r-CustObj class instance as follows
(with numbers corresponding to the numbered comments in the sample):
1. Defines a static ProDataSet object with a schema that is equivalent to the private dsHighCustData ProDataSet
   member defined by the r-CustObj class
2. Instantiates the r-CustObj class using the NEW statement, assigning its object reference to a variable (rObj)
   that the procedure uses to access this r-CustObj instance and all of its public members
3. Subscribes its internal procedure, CustHasInvoices_Handler, as a handler for the public CustHasInvoices
   event on the r-CustObj instance
4. Displays a message showing the default values of the r-CustObj public instance properties, HighCustNum and
   HighCustBalance
5. Calls the SetHighCustomerData( ) method on the r-CustObj instance, which initializes the r-CustObj
   public properties and private ProDataSet and publishes the CustHasInvoices event, causing the
   CustHasInvoices_Handler procedure to execute and display a message indicating each Customer that has
   invoices
6. Displays a message showing the initialized values of the r-CustObj public instance properties, HighCustNum
   and HighCustBalance
7. Calls the GetHighCustomerData( ) method on the r-CustObj instance to return its private ProDataSet
   member, dsHighCustData, as an output parameter, and storing the contents in its own equivalent ProDataSet
   object
8. Displays the contents of dsHighCustData in a down frame, showing fields from the Customer (ttCust) with
   the highest stored balance and related Invoice (ttInv) fields
                                                                                                     
r-CustObjProc.p

  /* 1 */
  DEFINE TEMP-TABLE ttCust NO-UNDO REFERENCE-ONLY LIKE Customer.
  DEFINE TEMP-TABLE ttInv NO-UNDO REFERENCE-ONLY LIKE Invoice.

  DEFINE DATASET dsHighCustData REFERENCE-ONLY FOR ttCust, ttInv
    DATA-RELATION FOR ttCust, ttInv
      RELATION-FIELDS (ttCust.CustNum, ttInv.CustNum).

  DEFINE VARIABLE rObj AS CLASS r-CustObj NO-UNDO.
  /* 2 */
  rObj = NEW r-CustObj( ) NO-ERROR.
  /* 3 */
  rObj:CustHasInvoices:Subscribe( "CustHasInvoices_Handler" ) NO-ERROR.
  /* 4 */
  MESSAGE "High Customer Number:" rObj:HighCustNum SKIP
          "High Customer Balance:" rObj:HighCustBalance VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.
  /* 5 */
  rObj:SetHighCustomerData( ) NO-ERROR.
  /* 6 */
  MESSAGE "High Customer Number:" rObj:HighCustNum SKIP
          "High Customer Balance:" rObj:HighCustBalance VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.
  /* 7 */
  rObj:GetHighCustomerData( OUTPUT DATASET dsHighCustData BIND ) NO-ERROR.
  /* 8 */
  CURRENT-WINDOW:WIDTH-CHARS = 90.

  FOR EACH ttCust, EACH ttInv BREAK BY ttInv.CustNum:
    DISPLAY ttCust.CustNum WHEN FIRST-OF(ttInv.CustNum)
             ttCust.Name WHEN FIRST-OF(ttInv.CustNum)
             ttCust.Balance WHEN FIRST-OF(ttInv.CustNum)
             ttInv.InvoiceNum ttInv.Amount SKIP
       WITH FRAME A WIDTH 90 DOWN
            TITLE "Customer with highest stored balance" NO-ERROR.
  END.

  PROCEDURE CustHasInvoices_Handler:
    DEFINE INPUT PARAMETER pCustNum AS INTEGER.

    FIND FIRST Customer WHERE Customer.CustNum = pCustNum NO-ERROR.
    IF AVAILABLE Customer THEN
      MESSAGE "Customer" Customer.CustNum ('"' + Customer.Name + '"')
              "has a stored balance of" Customer.Balance
              "and also has Invoices."
              VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.
  END PROCEDURE.


The following r-CustObjStatic.cls sample class file provides functionality similar to r-CustObj.cls, but
using static members instead. In addition, the class is not defined as FINAL. So, it can be inherited by an ABL subclass
(not shown, here). This sample class also implicitly inherits from Progress.Lang.Object. Note that this class
could include instance members as well. However, static members cannot reference instance members of the same class
hierarchy; so, any instance members would have to support additional functionality, which could only be accessible
using an instance of the class. The supported functionality, using static members, is available only as a function of the
class type.
So, in this class, all the members are static. Most of the data members, including the dsHighCustData ProDataSet
and its supporting temp-tables, buffers, query, and data-sources, are defined as protected, primarily allowing access to
its data either by a subclass or through its public properties and methods from outside the class hierarchy. However to
demonstrate a public data member, the handle variable for dsHighCustData is defined as public. The static class
 constructor (like the constructor in r-CustObj.cls) attaches these data sources to the ProDataSet temp-table buffers
and sets the handle variable (hHighCustData) for reference by the SetHighCustomerData( ) to fill and refill
the ProDataSet.
As another difference from r-CustObj.cls, note the use of the alternate static buffers (bHighCust, bCustomer,
and bInvoice), which allow other static members, such as the static query and method members, to access the database
Customer and Invoice tables. The default buffers of database tables cannot be accessed from a static class member
because ABL treats these buffers implicitly as instance members of the same class.
                      

r-CustObjStatic.cls

CLASS r-CustObjStatic:
  /* Public static properties to return basic values for a customer with the
     highest balance */
  DEFINE PUBLIC STATIC PROPERTY HighCustBalance AS DECIMAL INITIAL 0.0 NO-UNDO
    GET.
    PROTECTED SET.
  DEFINE PUBLIC STATIC PROPERTY HighCustNum AS INTEGER INITIAL ? NO-UNDO
    GET.
    PROTECTED SET.

/* Public static event to notify about Customers with Invoices */
  DEFINE PUBLIC STATIC EVENT CustHasInvoices
    SIGNATURE VOID ( piCustNum AS INTEGER ).

  /* Public static handle variable for the high customer ProDataSet */
  DEFINE PUBLIC STATIC VARIABLE hHighCustData AS HANDLE NO-UNDO.

  /* Protected static temp-tables for the high customer ProDataSet */
  DEFINE PROTECTED STATIC TEMP-TABLE ttCust NO-UNDO LIKE Customer.
  DEFINE PROTECTED STATIC TEMP-TABLE ttInv NO-UNDO LIKE Invoice.

  /* Protected static ProDataSet for a single customer with the highest
     balance and its invoices */
  DEFINE PROTECTED STATIC DATASET dsHighCustData FOR ttCust, ttInv
    DATA-RELATION FOR ttCust, ttInv
      RELATION-FIELDS (ttCust.CustNum, ttInv.CustNum).

  /* Protected static buffers for the ProDataSet query and data sources */
  DEFINE PROTECTED STATIC BUFFER bHighCust FOR Customer.
  DEFINE PROTECTED STATIC BUFFER bCustomer FOR Customer.
  DEFINE PROTECTED STATIC BUFFER bInvoice FOR Invoice.

  /* Protected static query and data sources for the ProDataSet */
  DEFINE PROTECTED STATIC QUERY qCust FOR bCustomer.
  DEFINE PROTECTED STATIC DATA-SOURCE srcCust FOR QUERY qCust.
  DEFINE PROTECTED STATIC DATA-SOURCE srcInv FOR bInvoice.

  /* Static constructor */
  CONSTRUCTOR STATIC r-CustObjStatic ( ):
    hHighCustData = DATASET dsHighCustData:HANDLE.
    BUFFER ttCust:ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE( DATA-SOURCE srcCust:HANDLE ).
    BUFFER ttInv:ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE( DATA-SOURCE srcInv:HANDLE ).
  END CONSTRUCTOR.

  /* Public static method to get the current high customer data */
  METHOD PUBLIC STATIC VOID GetHighCustomerData
    ( OUTPUT DATASET dsHighCustData BIND ):
  END METHOD.
  /* Public static method to set (or reset) the current high customer
     data */
  METHOD PUBLIC STATIC VOID SetHighCustomerData ( ):
    hHighCustData:EMPTY-DATASET( ).
    FOR EACH bHighCust: /* Find first customer with highest balance */
      FIND bInvoice WHERE bInvoice.CustNum = bHighCust.CustNum NO-ERROR.
      IF AVAILABLE bInvoice THEN DO:
         IF bHighCust.Balance > HighCustBalance THEN
           ASSIGN HighCustBalance = bHighCust.Balance
                   HighCustNum     = bHighCust.CustNum.
         CustHasInvoices:Publish( bHighCust.CustNum ).
      END.
    END.
    QUERY qCust:QUERY-PREPARE("FOR EACH bCustomer "

         + "WHERE bCustomer.CustNum = " + STRING(HighCustNum) ).
       hHighCustData:FILL( ).
     END METHOD.

  END CLASS.


To access the static members of this class from outside of its class definition (and any derived class), you do not need
to instantiate the class. You only need to reference the member using static type-name syntax, for example:

  r-CustObjStatic:SetHighCustomerData( ) NO-ERROR.


To access static members of a class from within the class definition or a derived class, you can typically reference the
member without any prefix, like any local variable of a procedure or method. However, when the class member has the
name of a reserved keyword, you must prefix the reference using static type-name syntax.
The following r-CustObjStaticProc.p sample procedure file displays static data from the r-CustObjStatic
class type in a manner similar to how r-CustObjProc.p displays instance data from an r-CustObj class instance,
except all references to public members are through the class type (r-CustObjStatic) instead of through an object
reference (rObj in r-CustObjProc.p). Thus, r-CustObjStaticProc.p has no need to instantiate
r-CustObjStatic. Otherwise, the application is exactly the same.


r-CustObjStaticProc.p

  DEFINE TEMP-TABLE ttCust NO-UNDO REFERENCE-ONLY LIKE Customer.
  DEFINE TEMP-TABLE ttInv NO-UNDO REFERENCE-ONLY LIKE Invoice.

  DEFINE DATASET dsHighCustData REFERENCE-ONLY FOR ttCust, ttInv
    DATA-RELATION FOR ttCust, ttInv
        RELATION-FIELDS (ttCust.CustNum, ttInv.CustNum).

  r-CustObjStatic:CustHasInvoices:Subscribe( "CustHasInvoices_Handler" )
    NO-ERROR.

  MESSAGE "High Customer Number:" r-CustObjStatic:HighCustNum SKIP
          "High Customer Balance:" r-CustObjStatic:HighCustBalance VIEW-AS
  ALERT-BOX.

  r-CustObjStatic:SetHighCustomerData( ) NO-ERROR.
  MESSAGE "High Customer Number:" r-CustObjStatic:HighCustNum SKIP
          "High Customer Balance:" r-CustObjStatic:HighCustBalance VIEW-AS
  ALERT-BOX.

  r-CustObjStatic:GetHighCustomerData( OUTPUT DATASET dsHighCustData
      BIND )
   NO-ERROR.

  CURRENT-WINDOW:WIDTH-CHARS = 90.

  FOR EACH ttCust, EACH ttInv BREAK BY ttInv.CustNum:
    DISPLAY ttCust.CustNum WHEN FIRST-OF(ttInv.CustNum)
             ttCust.Name WHEN FIRST-OF(ttInv.CustNum)
             ttCust.Balance WHEN FIRST-OF(ttInv.CustNum)
             ttInv.InvoiceNum ttInv.Amount SKIP
       WITH FRAME A WIDTH 90 DOWN
            TITLE "Customer with highest stored balance" NO-ERROR.
  END.

  PROCEDURE CustHasInvoices_Handler:
    DEFINE INPUT PARAMETER pCustNum AS INTEGER.

     FIND FIRST Customer WHERE Customer.CustNum = pCustNum NO-ERROR.
     IF AVAILABLE Customer THEN
       MESSAGE "Customer" Customer.CustNum ('"' + Customer.Name + '"')
               "has a stored balance of" Customer.Balance
               "and also has Invoices."
               VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.

  END PROCEDURE.


The following sample class files, r-CustObjAbstract.cls and r-CustObjAbstractImpl.cls, provide
functionality similar to r-CustObj.cls, but using a combination of abstract and non-abstract instance members that
are defined in the abstract class, r-CustObjAbstract, and inherited by the non-abstract class,
r-CustObjAbstractImpl.
The r-CustObjAbstract.cls class file defines the r-CustObjAbstract abstract class. Its abstract members
consist of most of the public members of the class, including properties, methods, and the class event. This class also
implicitly inherits from Progress.Lang.Object.
In this class, all the data members (which are always non-abstract), including the dsHighCustData ProDataSet and
its supporting handle variable, temp-tables, buffers, query, and data-sources, are defined as protected, allowing direct
access to its data from any subclass that inherits from it or through its public properties and methods (once implemented)
from outside the class hierarchy. The abstract class constructor (like the constructor in r-CustObj.cls) attaches the
data sources to the ProDataSet temp-table buffers and sets the handle variable (hHighCustData) for reference by the
subclass that implements the abstract SetHighCustomerData( ) method to fill and refill the ProDataSet. This
constructor also subscribes a private method (CustHasInvoices_Handler( )) as a handler for the abstract
CustHasInvoices event. This handler thus always responds to the event, no matter how it is implemented. Note
that the class cannot publish the event, because it has not yet been implemented.
One public method, GetHighCustomerData( ), is implemented (not abstract) because its only function is to return
dsHighCustData as an output parameter. If necessary, an abstract subclass can still override it again as abstract for
implementation further down the class hierarchy, or it can simply be overridden by any subclass. The abstract method,
SetHighCustomerData( ), is intended to be implemented any number of ways. For example, an alternative
implementation could accumulate an actual Customer balance from related Invoice.Amount values instead of
using the stored value of Customer.Balance, which does not necessarily match this total. For an example of this
implementation, see the r-ICustObjectImpl2.cls sample class file, which is described in the Examples section
of the INTERFACE statement on page 644 reference entry.
Also, note the use of the protected alternate buffers (bCustomer and bInvoice). These buffers allow access to the
database Customer and Invoice tables by certain protected class member definitions, including the ProDataSet
query and data-sources, that cannot reference the default buffers of database tables. ABL implicitly treats the default
buffers of database tables as private instance members of any class that references them; so they cannot be inherited
along with any protected member definitions where they might be included. As such, the protected buffers allow any
derived class to access the same buffers that are referenced in the protected member definitions it inherits.
                       
r-CustObjAbstract.cls


CLASS r-CustObjAbstract ABSTRACT:

  /* Public abstract properties to return basic values for a customer
     with the highest balance */
  DEFINE PUBLIC ABSTRACT PROPERTY HighCustBalance AS DECIMAL NO-UNDO
    GET.
    PROTECTED SET.
  DEFINE PUBLIC ABSTRACT PROPERTY HighCustNum AS INTEGER NO-UNDO
    GET.
    PROTECTED SET.

  /* Public abstract event to notify about Customers with Invoices */
  DEFINE PUBLIC ABSTRACT EVENT CustHasInvoices
    SIGNATURE VOID ( piCustNum AS INTEGER ).

  /* Protected handle variable for the high customer ProDataSet */
  DEFINE PROTECTED VARIABLE hHighCustData AS HANDLE NO-UNDO.

  /* Protected temp-tables for the high customer ProDataSet */
  DEFINE PROTECTED TEMP-TABLE ttCust NO-UNDO LIKE Customer.
  DEFINE PROTECTED TEMP-TABLE ttInv NO-UNDO LIKE Invoice.

  /* Protected ProDataSet for a single customer with the highest
     balance and its invoices */
  DEFINE PROTECTED DATASET dsHighCustData FOR ttCust, ttInv
    DATA-RELATION FOR ttCust, ttInv
      RELATION-FIELDS (ttCust.CustNum, ttInv.CustNum).

  /* Protected buffers for the ProDataSet query and data sources */
  DEFINE PROTECTED BUFFER bCustomer FOR Customer.
  DEFINE PROTECTED BUFFER bInvoice FOR Invoice.

  /* Private query   and data sources for the ProDataSet */
  DEFINE PROTECTED   QUERY qCust FOR bCustomer.
  DEFINE PROTECTED   DATA-SOURCE srcCust FOR QUERY qCust.
  DEFINE PROTECTED   DATA-SOURCE srcInv FOR bInvoice.

 /* Constructor to initialize handles and attach data sources */
  CONSTRUCTOR r-CustObjAbstract ( ):

    hHighCustData = DATASET dsHighCustData:HANDLE.
    BUFFER ttCust:ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE( DATA-SOURCE srcCust:HANDLE ).
    BUFFER ttInv:ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE( DATA-SOURCE srcInv:HANDLE ).
    CustHasInvoices:Subscribe( CustHasInvoices_Handler ) NO-ERROR.

  END CONSTRUCTOR.

 /* Default private event handler for the abstract CustHasInvoices event */
 METHOD PRIVATE VOID CustHasInvoices_Handler ( INPUT pArg AS INTEGER ):
   MESSAGE "Customer" pArg "has Invoices." VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.
 END METHOD.

  /* Public method to get the current high customer data */
  METHOD PUBLIC VOID GetHighCustomerData
    ( OUTPUT DATASET FOR dsHighCustData BIND ):

  END METHOD.

  /* Public abstract method to set (or reset) the current high customer
     data */
  METHOD PUBLIC ABSTRACT VOID SetHighCustomerData ( ).
                                                                                              
  END CLASS.


The r-CustObjAbstractImpl.cls class file defines the non-abstract r-CustObjAbstractImpl class, which
inherits r-CustObjAbstract and implements its abstract members. The class is not defined as FINAL. So, it can
be inherited by an ABL subclass (not shown, here).
The abstract member implementations include initial values for the HighCustBalance and HighCustNum properties,
the CustHasInvoices event so it can be published, and the SetHighCustomerData( ) method, which is
implemented almost exactly the same as for r-CustObj, to set these properties, fill the ProDataSet, and publish the
event when appropriate.
r-CustObjAbstractImpl.cls

  CLASS r-CustObjAbstractImpl INHERITS r-CustObjAbstract:

     /* Public properties implemented to return basic values for a customer
        with the highest balance */
     DEFINE OVERRIDE PUBLIC PROPERTY HighCustBalance AS DECIMAL INITIAL 0.0
         NO-UNDO
       GET.
       PROTECTED SET.
     DEFINE OVERRIDE PUBLIC PROPERTY HighCustNum AS INTEGER INITIAL ?
         NO-UNDO
       GET.
       PROTECTED SET.

     /* Public event implemented to notify about Customers with Invoices */
     DEFINE PUBLIC OVERRIDE EVENT CustHasInvoices
       SIGNATURE VOID (INPUT piCustNum AS INTEGER).

     /* Public method implemented to set (or reset) the current high
        customer data based on the stored value of Customer.Balance */
     METHOD OVERRIDE PUBLIC VOID SetHighCustomerData ( ):

        hHighCustData:EMPTY-DATASET( ).
        FOR EACH Customer: /* Find Customer with highest balance */
          FIND FIRST Invoice WHERE Invoice.CustNum = Customer.CustNum NO-ERROR.
          IF AVAILABLE Invoice THEN DO:
             IF Customer.Balance > HighCustBalance THEN
               ASSIGN HighCustBalance = Customer.Balance
                       HighCustNum     = Customer.CustNum.
             CustHasInvoices:Publish( Customer.CustNum ).
          END.
        END.
        QUERY qCust:QUERY-PREPARE("FOR EACH bCustomer "
          + "WHERE bCustomer.CustNum = " + STRING(HighCustNum) ).
        hHighCustData:FILL( ).

     END METHOD.

  END CLASS.


Note that from within r-CustObjAbstractImpl, members inherited from r-CustObjAbstract (such as
hHighCustData and HighCustBalance) are accessed without any prefix, as if they were defined in the same
class. You can access any inherited member of a super class this way. However, if an inherited instance member has
the name of a reserved keyword, you must prefix the member reference with THIS-OBJECT. For more information,
see the reference entry for the THIS-OBJECT system reference on page 997. For an inherited static member named with
a reserved keyword, you must use static type-name syntax as previously described for the r-CustObjStatic class.
                                                                                                      
The following r-CustObjAbstractProc.p sample procedure file displays data from an instance of
r-CustObjAbstractImpl in a manner similar to how r-CustObjProc.p displays data from an instance of
r-CustObj. The only difference is in the event handler procedure (CustHasInvoices_Handler) which responds
to the CustHasInvoice event in way that works more smoothly with the event handler provided by the
r-CustObjAbstract class. Otherwise, the application is exactly the same.
r-CustObjAbstractProc.p

    DEFINE TEMP-TABLE ttCust NO-UNDO REFERENCE-ONLY LIKE Customer.
    DEFINE TEMP-TABLE ttInv NO-UNDO REFERENCE-ONLY LIKE Invoice.

    DEFINE DATASET dsHighCustData REFERENCE-ONLY FOR ttCust, ttInv
      DATA-RELATION FOR ttCust, ttInv
        RELATION-FIELDS (ttCust.CustNum, ttInv.CustNum).

    DEFINE VARIABLE rObj AS CLASS r-CustObjAbstractImpl NO-UNDO.

    rObj = NEW r-CustObjAbstractImpl( ) NO-ERROR.
    rObj:CustHasInvoices:Subscribe( "CustHasInvoices_Handler" ) NO-ERROR.

    MESSAGE "High Customer Number:" rObj:HighCustNum SKIP
            "High Customer Balance:" rObj:HighCustBalance VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.

    rObj:SetHighCustomerData( ) NO-ERROR.

    MESSAGE "High Customer Number:" rObj:HighCustNum SKIP
            "High Customer Balance:" rObj:HighCustBalance VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.

    rObj:GetHighCustomerData( OUTPUT DATASET dsHighCustData BIND ) NO-ERROR.

    CURRENT-WINDOW:WIDTH-CHARS = 90.

    FOR EACH ttCust, EACH ttInv BREAK BY ttInv.CustNum:
      DISPLAY ttCust.CustNum WHEN FIRST-OF(ttInv.CustNum)
               ttCust.Name WHEN FIRST-OF(ttInv.CustNum)
               ttCust.Balance WHEN FIRST-OF(ttInv.CustNum)
               ttInv.InvoiceNum ttInv.Amount SKIP
         WITH FRAME A WIDTH 90 DOWN
              TITLE "Customer with highest stored balance" NO-ERROR.
    END.

    PROCEDURE CustHasInvoices_Handler:
      DEFINE INPUT PARAMETER pCustNum AS INTEGER.

      FIND FIRST Customer WHERE Customer.CustNum = pCustNum NO-ERROR.
      IF AVAILABLE Customer THEN
        MESSAGE pCustNum ('"' + Customer.Name + '"')
                "has a stored balance of" (STRING(Customer.Balance) + ".")
                VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.

    END PROCEDURE.



Notes
•   You can terminate a CLASS statement with either a period (.) or a colon (:), but typically use a colon (:).
•   A class definition (.cls) file can contain only one class definition that is optionally preceded by one or more USING
    statements, a BLOCK-LEVEL ON ERROR UNDO, THROW statement, or a ROUTINE-LEVEL ON ERROR
    UNDO, THROW statement. The complete class definition must begin with the CLASS statement and end with the
    END statement, and the CLASS statement must be the first compilable statement after any USING. BLOCK-LEVEL
    ON ERROR UNDO, THROW, or ON ERROR UNDO, THROW statements in the file. A class definition file containing
    a class definition cannot also contain an interface definition.
•   The access mode for a class definition is always PUBLIC.
•   In effect, a user-defined class represents a unique data type. In ABL, you can use a class type much as you would
    any ABL built-in data type. You can define variables, parameters, return types, and class-based properties as a class
    type. These data elements can then hold a reference to a class instance (object reference). You can also assign an
    object reference to a temp-table field defined as the Progress.Lang.Object class type; but you cannot assign an object
    reference to a database table field. You can use the object reference to a class to access PUBLIC instance members
    of that class. For more information on object references, see the reference entry for a Class-based object reference
    on page 127. You can also use a class type name to access available static members of that class, whether or not an
    instance of the class exists. 
•   The class name part of class-type-name can be an ABL reserved keyword (such as Display). If it is a reserved
    keyword, note that ABL does not fully support user-defined class names that are identical to reserved keywords. 
•   You can reference include files from within a class definition file. 
•   All built-in preprocessor directives are supported in class definition files.
•   All built-in preprocessor names are supported in class definition files. 
•   You cannot pass compile-time arguments to class definition files. However, you can pass compile-time arguments
    to include files referenced in a class definition file.
•   The compiled version of a class definition file is an r-code (.r) file. For more information, see the COMPILE
    statement on page 171 reference entry.
•   You cannot run r-code compiled for a class definition file with the RUN statement.
•   Non-PRIVATE data members and properties within a class definition (.cls) file maintain their characteristics
    throughout the inherited class hierarchy. Thus, you cannot override non-PRIVATE data members and properties in
    a subclass that are defined in a super class. In other words, you cannot define a data member or property in a subclass
    using the same name as a non-PRIVATE data member or property defined in one of its super classes.
•   You can create an instance of a class using the NEW function, the New( ) method of the Progress.Lang.Class
    class, the NEW statement, or the DYNAMIC-NEW statement, and assign the object reference returned for that instance
    as the value of a data element defined to reference instances of that class type. You can access an object instance,
    as well as its PUBLIC instance data members, properties, and methods, using its associated object reference.
    PACKAGE-PROTECTED and PACKAGE-PRIVATE instance data members, properties, and methods can be accessed
    by objects within the same package as the object instance.
    •   The static members of a class are initialized with the first reference to its class type and just prior to execution of its
    static constructor, whether or not the class is instantiated in the process. These members remain in ABL session
    memory until the session ends or until the defining class is recompiled. Note that static data members and properties
    are not constant; the values of static data members can be changed like any data member, and the values of static
    properties can be changed as provided by the property definition. 
•   ABL provides a system reference for the currently running instance of this class, called THIS-OBJECT. 
•   If this class is a subclass of some super class, you can use the SUPER system reference within a class instance to
    access the PUBLIC, PACKAGE-PROTECTED, and PROTECTED instance methods of all super classes within the
    inherited class hierarchy.
•   You can store class definition r-code files in ABL libraries (procedure libraries (.pl) and archive files (.apl)). If
    the AVM encounters a library on the PROPATH, it will search the library for the specified r-code. However, you
    cannot execute r-code files stored in a library that is not on PROPATH using the library-path<<member-name>>
    syntax.
•   You cannot define a NEW SHARED or NEW GLOBAL SHARED variable in a class definition (.cls) file.
•   You cannot use ActiveX controls within a class definition (.cls) file. However, you can use COM automation
    objects within a class definition (.cls) file, with any event handlers for a COM object defined in a procedure file.
•   For more information on class definition (.cls) files, see Develop Object-oriented ABL Applications.
•   If you inherit a .NET class, implement a .NET interface, or otherwise access a .NET object type in a class definition,
    ABL must find the assembly that defines the .NET object type at compile time. For information on how ABL locates
    and identifies .NET object types, see the Type-name syntax on page 1011 reference entry.
•   Although you can override the .NET WndProc( ) method, doing so can be risky. The method will be called for
    every event, like WM_MOUSEMOVE and WM_PAINT, so it could be called thousands of times for a single form,
    causing performance issues. It can also be called at unexpected times and cause unexpected behavior. Overriding
    WndProc when using ABL embedded windows with .NET forms could be especially problematic. See Develop
    Object-oriented ABL Applications for more information.
•   If you inherit a .NET class, the GetType( ) instance method (inherited from System.Object) returns incomplete
    information for the ABL part of the object.
•   If you inherit a .NET class, you cannot:
    •   Override the .NET Dispose( ) or Finalize( ) method
    •   Define a method with certain reserved method names
    •   You cannot:
    •   Inherit from a .NET class that is, itself, defined with any of the following .NET directives (as specified in C#):
        •   internal
        •   private
        •   sealed
        •   static
    •   Define an ABL class that can become an additional part for a .NET partial class
    •   Inherit from a .NET abstract class that defines an abstract indexed property
    •   Inherit from a .NET generic class
    •   Inherit from the following .NET class types or any class types that are derived from them:
        •   System.Delegate
        •   System.Enum
        •   System.Threading.Thread
        •   System.ValueType
    •   Implement a .NET interface that:
        •   .NET defines as private or internal (as specified in C#)
        •   Is generic or that defines a generic method prototype
        •   Defines an indexed property prototype (including a default indexed property)



CONSTRUCTOR statement
  Defines a constructor for a class. A constructor is a special type of method that ABL invokes to initialize data for a new
  object of a class that is instantiated using the NEW function (classes) on page 713, NEW statement on page 717, or
  DYNAMIC-NEW statement on page 471, or to initialize static members of a class.
  Note: This statement is applicable only when used in a class definition (.cls) file.

  Syntax

      CONSTRUCTOR [PRIVATE|PACKAGE-PRIVATE|PROTECTED|PACKAGE-PROTECTED|PUBLIC]
      [STATIC]
        class-name ( [ parameter [ , parameter ] ... ] ) :

       constructor-body


  [PRIVATE|PACKAGE-PRIVATE|PROTECTED|PACKAGE-PROTECTED|PUBLIC]
           Specifies the access mode for the constructor.
              A PRIVATE constructor can be called by the defining class or another instance of the same class. This
              is done via the THIS-OBJECT statement on page 996 within another constructor of the class or using
              the NEW statement or function anywhere within the class. To create the first instance of a class with
              only a private constructor, you can call a static method in the class which will use NEW to create an
              instance.
              A PACKAGE-PRIVATE constructor can be called from the defining class or any class within its
              package. This is done via the SUPER statement within another constructor or using the NEW statement
              or function elsewhere.
              A PROTECTED constructor can be called from the defining class or a subclass. This is done via the
              SUPER statement within another constructor or using the NEW statement  or
              NEW function (classes) elsewhere.
              A PACKAGE-PROTECTED constructor can be called from the defining class, from a subclass, or from
              any class within its package. This is done via the SUPER statement within another constructor or using
              the NEW statement or function elsewhere.
              A PUBLIC constructor can be called from any code (in a class or procedure) that has access to the
              class instance. This is done via the SUPER statement within another constructor or using the NEW
              statement or function elsewhere.
              The default access mode is PUBLIC.
  [ STATIC ]
                  STATIC specifies a static constructor that executes exactly once in an ABL session the first time you
             reference a class type that defines this constructor in its class hierarchy. You cannot invoke a static
             constructor in any other way or at any other time. You can define only one static constructor for a
             given class. If you do not define a static constructor, ABL defines a default static constructor to initialize
             the static members of a class.
class-name
             The name of the class this method constructs. This name must match the class name portion of the
             type name for the class (that is, the name of the class definition file excluding the .cls extension and
             any package path information).
( [ parameter [ , parameter]...] )
           Optionally specifies one or more parameters of the constructor. Any instance constructor defined
           without a parameter list is the default instance constructor for the defining class. The parameter list
           for a defined static constructor must be empty.
             If this instance constructor is one of several overloaded constructors defined for a class, the parameter
             list must be unique among all the other constructors. This uniqueness can be established using a
             different combination of number, data types, or modes for the parameters. For information on the
             parameter definition syntax and establishing uniqueness for overloaded constructors, see the Parameter
             definition syntax on page 778 reference entry. Note that any defined static constructor does not participate
             in constructor overloading with instance constructors.
constructor-body
           The body of the constructor definition. Define the constructor body using the following syntax:

               constructor-logic
               . . .
               END [ CONSTRUCTOR ].


             constructor-logic
             The logic of the constructor, which can contain any ABL statements currently allowed within a
             PROCEDURE block including class-related statements. These statements typically contain logic to
             initialize the data members and properties in the class.
             Each logic statement must end with a period.
             If you are defining an instance constructor, regardless of other statements in the constructor, the first
             action of the constructor must be a call to another instance constructor in the defining class or in the
             immediate super class. ABL can call a default super class constructor implicitly, or you can call a
             super class constructor or another overloaded constructor in the defining class explicitly as the first
             statement of a constructor. You cannot explicitly call another constructor in any other statement of a
             constructor, and you cannot call any defined static constructor.
             If there is no constructor instance defined in the immediate super class and you do not explicitly invoke
             a constructor, ABL always implicitly invokes the built-in default super class constructor (without
             parameters) as the first action. If there is an instance constructor defined in the super class that does
             not take parameters, you also do not need to explicitly invoke an instance constructor. ABL implicitly
             invokes this user-defined default super class constructor. You only need to explicitly invoke another
             instance constructor when the super class has constructors defined for it and all of these constructors
             take parameters.
             When you invoke an instance constructor that takes parameters, again, you must invoke that constructor
             as the first executable statement in the invoking constructor. If you want to invoke a super class instance
             constructor, you must invoke the SUPER statement  with parameters that match the
             parameters of the super class constructor with respect to number, data type, and mode.
             If you want to invoke an overloaded instance constructor of the defining class, you must invoke the
             THIS-OBJECT statement on page 996 as the first statement, with parameters that match the parameters
            of the overloaded constructor with respect to number, data type, and mode. If you invoke an overloaded
            constructor, and that overloaded constructor does not invoke another overloaded constructor, it must
            invoke a super class constructor, either implicitly (the default) or explicitly as its first statement. So,
            in any chain of explicit calls from one overloaded constructor to another, the last overloaded constructor
            in the chain must invoke a super class constructor.
            If you are defining a static constructor, you cannot access any instance members of a class (including
            the defining class), nor can you use the SUPER and THIS-OBJECT statements. From a static
            constructor, you can access only other static members of a class and the local variables or other local
            data elements of the constructor.
 
 END [ CONSTRUCTOR ]
            Specifies the end of the constructor body definition. You must end the constructor body definition
            with the END statement.

Examples
The following example shows the definition of an instance constructor:

    CONSTRUCTOR PUBLIC CustObj( ):

      m_NumCusts = 0.

      /* Fill a temp table and get the row count */
      FOR EACH Customer NO-LOCK:
        CREATE ttCust.
        ASSIGN
           ttCust.CustNum = Customer.CustNum
           ttCust.Name    = Customer.Name
           m_NumCusts     = m_NumCusts + 1.
      END.

    END CONSTRUCTOR.



Notes
•   You can terminate a CONSTRUCTOR statement with either a period (.) or a colon (:), but typically use a colon (:).
•   A constructor definition must begin with the CONSTRUCTOR statement and end with the END statement.
•   A constructor has no return type.
•   You never explicitly invoke an instance constructor to create a class instance. The constructor is implicitly invoked
    when you instantiate the defining class using the NEW function (classes), NEW statement,
    or DYNAMIC-NEW statement, passing any parameters required to identify the instantiating constructor.
    The instantiating constructor then directly or indirectly calls an instance constructor in its immediate super class,
    which similarly calls an instance constructor in its immediate super class, and so on for all classes in the class
    hierarchy, until the default instance constructor of the root (Progress.Lang.Object class) is called. From this point,
    the root constructor and all previously called instance constructors complete execution in reverse order of invocation,
    terminating class instantiation with completion of the initial instantiating constructor.
•   Within a class hierarchy, you can explicitly invoke an instance constructor from an instance constructor of an
    immediate subclass using the SUPER statement or from an overloaded constructor in the same defining
    class using the THIS-OBJECT statement. The invoking constructor must specify any parameters required
    to identify the called constructor. These parameters must match the constructor parameters with respect to the number,
    data type, and mode.
                                                                                                          
   •   You never explicitly invoke a static constructor. All the static constructors of a class hierarchy with static members
       execute on first reference to a given class within an ABL session. This first reference causes the static constructors
       of all super classes in the referenced class hierarchy that have static members to execute from top to bottom, terminating
       with the execution of the static constructor for the most derived class with static members. For any single class with
       static members, its static constructor runs only once per ABL session or until after the given class is compiled again.
       If the first reference to a class occurs during class instantiation, this sequence of static constructor execution occurs
       prior to execution of the instantiating constructor. Thus, all static constructors in a class hierarchy are guaranteed to
       execute before a class instance is referenced.
   •   Prior to execution of a given static constructor, all of the static data members and properties of the defining class are
       set to their initial values. The constructor then accesses these initial values of static members, as appropriate. This
       initialization of static members occurs only once per session or until the class is recompiled.
   •   You can handle application errors in an instance constructor as in any ABL block. However, by executing a RETURN
       ERROR action at the block level or a THROW action at the block level with the presence of a BLOCK-LEVEL ON
       ERROR UNDO, THROW statement on page 90, or a ROUTINE-LEVEL ON ERROR UNDO, THROW statement
       on page 895, the AVM returns the ERROR condition from the constructor block. With this returned ERROR condition,
       ABL terminates creation of the object. If any part of the class hierarchy has been created (constructors executed),
       ABL executes the corresponding destructors for those classes automatically and raises ERROR on the statement that
       instantiated the class. If this constructor is invoked as part of a NEW statement or DYNAMIC-NEW statement, the data
       element set to receive an object reference to the failed class instantiation remains unchanged. If a RETURN ERROR
       also includes the option to return a character string value, or you set the ReturnValue property of a
       Progess.Lang.AppError object that you THROW, you can get this value using the RETURN-VALUE function
       on page 891 following the statement that attempted to instantiate the class or in a CATCH block that catches the
       Progress.Lang.AppError object. For more information, see Develop Object-oriented ABL Applications.
   •   You can handle application errors in a static constructor similar to an instance constructor. However, an ERROR
       condition returned from the constructor block is raised on the statement whose class reference caused the static
       constructor to be invoked (whether or not the statement instantiates the class). With this ERROR condition, ABL
       fails to loaded the specified class and its entire class hierarchy. In addition, ABL does not load the specified class,
       or the other classes of its class hierarchy, for the remainder of the ABL session, or until the specified class is
       recompiled.

DEFINE ENUM statement
Defines a user-defined enumeration (also known as an enumerated type or enum). An enum is made up of a list of
   strongly typed, named constants called members. The value of a variable defined as an enum is restricted to the list of
   members defined for that enum. Some of the advantages of enums are that they are self-documenting, strongly typed,
   and validated at compile time (i.e., the compiler verifies that a variable defined as an enum can only contain values
   defined by that enum).
   In addition to being named, each member also has an underlying numeric value associated with it. By default, the
   compiler sets those associated values automatically. Generally, you do not need to worry about the numerical values,
   but you can specify one or more of the values explicitly if desired.
   You can define two types of enum. In the standard version, a variable defined as an enum can only be assigned one
   value at a time. You can also define a flag enum. Any variable defined as a flag enum can be assigned any combination
   of the members (also referred to as "flags" for flag enums) at one time. You can perform operations on flag enum
   variables to set and unset one or more of the flags.
   All enums implicitly inherit from one of two classes. The single-value enums inherit from Progress.Lang.Enum,
   and flag enums inherit from Progress.Lang.FlagsEnum, which is a subclass of Progress.Lang.Enum. See
   the Progress.Lang.Enum class and Progress.Lang.FlagsEnum class entries for more information.

   Syntax

     ENUM enum-type-name [FLAGS]:
         DEFINE ENUM enum-member-definition
                   [enum-member-definition] ...
     END [ENUM].


   enum-type-name
             Defines the type name for a user-defined enum. You can specify an ABL enum name in a way similar
             to how you specify an ABL class type. All the requirements and restrictions on how to specify an ABL
             class type apply to an enum. 
   FLAGS
              Defines the enum as a flag enum, with the defined members acting as flags. This allows you to set one
              or more flags into the same variable. You can define up to 64 distinct members to be used as flags.
              You can also define a flag as a combination of other flags, and a flag defined this way does not count
              as a distinct flag.
   enum-member-definition
           Defines a member using the following syntax:

                 member-name [ = {member-name [, member-name]... }
                     | constant ]


              member-name
              Specifies the name of the member. Each member name must be unique among the names of all members
              defined in the enum as well as all properties, events, and variable data members that are defined in
              the class hierarchy and accessible to the defining class. The rules for member names follow the same
              rules that are in place for variable and property names. Member names are case insensitive and can
              be reserved keywords.
              member-name [, member-name]
              Assigns the same numeric value as a previously defined member. In this way, you can define multiple
              members as equivalent with the same underlying value. For flag enums, you can also equate an member        
           with multiple, previously defined members, entered as a comma-delimited list. 
constant
           Defines the numeric value associated with the member. The value must be a constant of type INT64.
           The value can be represented in hexadecimal notation (for easier readability with flag enums, for
           example).
           If the first member is not explicitly assigned a value, the compiler starts with a value of 1. For each
           subsequent member not assigned a value, the compiler assigns a value 1 larger than the previous
           member for a single-value enum, or the next power of 2 for a flag enum.
           Note: Flag enums are the primary use case for explicitly setting the underlying values of members.
           Progress recommends that, when defining a flag enum, you always explicitly define a member with
           a value of 0.
END [ENUM]
        Specifies the end of the enum definition. You must end the enum definition with the END statement.

Examples
The following example shows how to define an enum with the four cardinal directions as its named values:

  ENUM Direction:
      DEFINE ENUM North
                  South
                  East
                  West.
  END ENUM.


The next example shows how to define an member as equivalent to another:

  ENUM Direction:
      DEFINE ENUM North
                  Default = North
                  South
                  East
                  West.
  END ENUM.


In this case, both North and Default have an underlying value of 1.
The following is an example of a flag enum, including the member ReadWrite being defined as a combination of
previously defined members:

  ENUM Permission FLAGS:
      DEFINE ENUM None = 0
                  Read
                  Write
                  Update = Write
                  ReadWrite = Read,Write
                  Create
                  Delete
                  Execute.
  END ENUM.

For flag enums, it is recommended that you include an member with an underlying value of 0, representing no flags set.
Because the compiler automatically starts with a value of 1 for both single-value and flag enums, you must define an
member with a value of 0 explicitly.
The syntax for assigning a value to a variable defined as an enum is similar to the syntax used to assign values to static
data members of a class:

    enum-type-name:member-name


Using the Direction enum from the first example, this code fragment defines myDirection as a variable of type
Direction and assigns myDirection the member South:

    DEFINE VARIABLE myDirection AS Direction.

    myDirection = Direction:South.


This syntax cannot be used to set multiple flags for a variable defined as a flag enum. To set multiple flags, you need
to use bitwise operators or the SetFlag( ), ToggleFlag( ), and UnsetFlag( ) methods, as described in the
Notes section of this entry.
Members are read-only, so the following code will not compile:

    Direction:South = myDirection.


Like other uninitialized class references, variables defined as enums have an initial value of the unknown (?) value.

Notes
•   Each member represents an instance of an object of the type of enum that defines them. When you reference a
    member, you get an instance that is maintained by the AVM.
•   Because enums are implicitly class based, you can use them in many of the same ways you can use a class type or
    instance. You can define variables, parameters, return types, and class-based properties as an enum. These data
    elements can then hold a reference to an enum instance. For example, using the Permission enum defined in the
    Examples, the following code fragments are all valid:

      METHOD PUBLIC Permission SomeOperation (INPUT perm AS Permission):
      END.

      PROCEDURE proc:
       DEFINE INPUT-OUTPUT PARAMETER perm AS Permission.
      END.

      FUNCTION func1 RETURNS Permission (OUTPUT perm AS Permission):
      END.


    You can explicitly pass members as INPUT parameters using the enum-type-name:member-name syntax, but
    because the member itself cannot be modified, it cannot be passed as an OUTPUT or INPUT-OUTPUT parameter.
    For example, the following is not allowed:

      RUN proc1 (INPUT-OUTPUT Permission:Read).

    You can also assign an enum object reference to a temp-table field defined as the Progress.Lang.Object class type,
    but you cannot assign an enum object reference to a database table field. For more information on object references
    in general, see the reference entry for a Class-based object reference on page 127.
•   Enums must be defined in a .cls file by themselves, not with other class or interface definitions.
•   Although enums are implicitly class based, you can not instantiate an enum using NEW. You must use the type-name
    syntax shown in the Examples section to access the members defined in an enum, or use the GetEnum( ) method
    to get an enum instance. The method takes an enum member name as a CHARACTER or the underlying numeric
    value of a member as an INT64 and returns an enum instance. For example, both of the following lines of code create
    an enum instance using the Direction enum type, and in both cases, myDirection is assigned the member
    South:

      DEFINE VARIABLE myDirection AS Direction.

      myDirection = Direction:GetEnum("South").
      myDirection = Direction:GetEnum(2).


    This method is not part of the implementation of Progress.Lang.Enum, but it is automatically available for all
    built-in and user-defined enum types. For full details, see the GetEnum( ) method entry.
•   All enums are final. They also cannot explicitly inherit from another class or implement interfaces.
•   Enums are serializable. You can pass parameters defined as enums between an ABL client and an application server.
•   Much of the functionality for classes is also supported for enums, including package names, the USING statement,
    reflection, and assignment and casting rules. Unlike classes, however, enums cannot have data members, properties,
    events, or user-defined methods.
•   You can define variables, properties, and parameters using the AS CLASS phrase. For example:

      DEFINE VARIABLE myDirection AS CLASS Direction.


•   In the original Direction enum example, the underlying values for the members are automatically set by the
    compiler as 1 for North, 2 for South, and so on. However, you can change this pattern by explicitly setting one
    or more of the numerical values. For example:

      ENUM Direction:
          DEFINE ENUM North
                      South
                      East = 4
                      West.
      END ENUM.


    In this case, the underlying values for the members are still automatically set by the compiler as 1 for North, 2 for
    South. East is explicitly set as 4, so the compiler sets the value of West as one larger than the previous member,
    which in this case will be 5. The same rules hold true for flag enums, except that the compiler assigns the next power
    of 2 to each member that does not have its underlying value explicitly set.
                                                                                                     
•   When you have to explicitly set the underlying value of an member, you can use hexadecimal notation, particularly
    for ease of readability with flag enums. Following is the Permission enum with the underlying values explicitly
    set:

        ENUM Permission FLAGS:
            DEFINE ENUM None = 0
                        Read = 0x01
                        Write = 0x02
                        Update = 0x02
                        ReadWrite = 0x03
                        Create = 0x04
                        Delete = 0x08
                        Execute = 0x10.
        END ENUM.


•   If desired, you can split the defined list of members in an ENUM statement into two or more DEFINE ENUM
    statements for readability. For example:

        ENUM Direction:
            DEFINE ENUM North
                        South.
            DEFINE ENUM East
                        West.
        END ENUM.


    The same rules for how the compiler assigns the underlying numerical values still apply, i.e., in the example above,
    South has an underlying value of 2, and East has an underlying value of 3. In other words, the underlying numerical
    values will be assigned according to the order of the members, regardless of whether or not the member list is split
    into multiple DEFINE ENUM statements.
    Note: Although you can split the list of members into separate DEFINE ENUM statements, the list of members for
    a given enum must be completely defined in a single ENUM statement. Additional members cannot be added to a
    defined enum in a separate ENUM statement.
•   The following comparison operators can be used with enums, as long as the two expressions being compared are
    both defined as the same enum type:
    •   EQ (=)
    •   NE (<>)
    •   GT (>)
    •   LT (<)
    •   GE (>=)
    •   LE (<=)
    When used with expressions that are enum types, the operators compare the underlying numerical values of the
    members. Comparisons can be made using either single-value enums or flag enums. Using the previously defined
    Direction enum, this code fragment shows a comparison and results in the message being displayed:

        DEFINE VARIABLE myDirection AS Direction.

        myDirection = Direction:South.

        IF myDirection NE Direction:North THEN
           MESSAGE "The current heading is not north."
              VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.

    You can only use the comparison operators for two expressions defined as the same enum type.
    The CompareTo( ) method of Progress.Lang.Enum also allows you to compare enum instances based on the
    members' numeric values. See the CompareTo( ) method entry for details.
•   The CASE statement also supports the use of enums. For example, using the Direction enum defined in the
    Examples section:

        DEFINE VARIABLE myDirection AS Direction.

        myDirection = Direction:South.

        CASE myDirection:
           WHEN Direction:North THEN
              MESSAGE "Your current direction is north.".
           WHEN Direction:South THEN
              MESSAGE "Your current direction is south.".
           OTHERWISE
              MESSAGE "Your current direction is east, west, or unknown.".
        END CASE.



    The expressions in the WHEN phrases must be members from the enum type in the CASE statement.
    Note: You can use flag enums with the CASE statement, but be aware that the WHEN phrases check for equality
    of the members strictly based on numeric values, not as combinations of multiple flags. For example, in the following
    code, the two WHEN statements for Permission:Read and Permission:Write will not fire for the given
    value of myPermission; the OTHERWISE statement will.

        DEFINE VARIABLE myPermission AS Permission.

        myPermission = Permission:ReadWrite.

        CASE myPermission:
           WHEN Permission:Read THEN
              MESSAGE "You can read data.".
           WHEN Permission:Write THEN
              MESSAGE "You can write data.".
           OTHERWISE
              ...
        END CASE.




•   The following bitwise operators can be used with flag enums. Each operator does a bitwise comparison of two enum
    expressions and returns a new enum instance as a result:
    •   Bitwise AND: Check the state of a particular flag.
    •   Bitwise OR: Set a flag.
    •   Bitwise XOR (exclusive OR): Toggle a flag.
    •   Bitwise NOT (complement): Turn off a flag.
                CAUTION: Because bitwise NOT turns off flags, it is possible to end up with an enum instance with
                no flags set, i.e., a value of 0. Always defining an member with value 0 is recommended to avoid an
                enum expression that doesn't correspond to any defined members.


    As with the logical comparison operators, both expressions must be the same enum type. If they are not, the code
    will not compile.


    Using the Permission enum from the Examples section, the following examples show use cases of the bitwise
    operators:

        DEFINE VARIABLE myPermissions AS Permission.

        /* myPermissions is set with a Permission instance with the Read and
           Write flags set. */
        myPermissions = Permission:Read OR Permission:Write.

        /* All flags are set with the possible exception of Create, which is
           toggled. */
        myPermissions = myPermissions XOR Permission:Create.

        /* Ensures that the Create flag is not set. */
        myPermissions = myPermissions AND NOT Permission:Create.

        /* All flags are set except Create. */
        myPermissions = NOT Permission:Create.

        /* Checks to see if Read is set. */
        IF (myPermissions AND Permission:Read) = Permission:Read THEN ...

        /* Three additional ways to check if Read is set. */
        IF (myPermissions AND Permission:Read):Equals(Permission:Read) THEN ...

        IF myPermissions:IsFlagSet(Permission:Read) THEN ...

        IF (myPermissions AND Permission:Read) NE Permission:None THEN ...


    The order of operator precedence for bitwise and logical operators is the following:
    •   bitwise NOT
    •   logical NOT
    •   bitwise AND
    •   bitwise XOR
    •   bitwise OR
    •   logical AND
    •   logical OR
    In practice, the order of precedence for bitwise and logical operators are independent because the bitwise operators
    return an enum instance and the logical operators return a logical. Code like the following will not compile because
    enum1 AND enum2 returns an enum instance, and a logical is required for the OR part of the statement:

        IF enum1 AND enum2 OR iCount <> 1...


    •   In addition to the bitwise operators, there are three methods that you can use to set and unset flags: the ToggleFlag(
    ) method, the SetFlag( ) method, and the UnsetFlag( ) method. These methods are not part of the implementation of
    Progress.Lang.FlagsEnum, but they are automatically available for all built-in and user-defined flag enums.
•   The MINIMUM and MAXIMUM functions do not support enums.
•   The STRING and QUOTER functions return a member name for enum-valued expressions. For flag enum-valued
    expressions with multiple flags set, STRING returns a comma-separated list of member names. Similarly, PUT will
    send the appropriate member name(s) to the output destination.

   •   The INTEGER, INT64, and DECIMAL functions return the underlying numeric value of an member for enum-valued
       expressions. Given that the numeric values of an member are of type INT64, it is possible the INTEGER function
       will raise an error with an member if the numeric value cannot be represented as an INTEGER.
   •   Calling DELETE OBJECT on an enum instance will be silently ignored because enum instances are maintained by
       the AVM. Enums also do not appear in the SESSION-FIRST-OBJECT/SESSION-LAST-OBJECT chain.


DEFINE EVENT statement
   Defines an ABL class event, declares a class event prototype in an ABL interface, or overrides an abstract class event
   inherited from an ABL or .NET abstract super class. A class event is a member of the class in which it is defined. You
   can publish a non-abstract event from within the defining class definition using the built-in Publish( ) event method in
   response to a condition that you determine. You can subscribe a class method or internal procedure as a handler for any
   accessible event (abstract or non-abstract) using the built-in Subscribe( ) event method. This handler executes whenever
   the event is published. You can also unsubscribe any handler using the built-in Unsubscribe( ) event method. The
   following description begins with general syntax for defining a class event.
   Note: This statement is applicable only when used in a class or interface definition (.cls) file. For more information
   on class events, see the Class Events Reference.

   Syntax

     DEFINE [ PRIVATE | PACKAGE-PRIVATE | PROTECTED | PACKAGE-PROTECTED | PUBLIC
     ]
       [ STATIC | ABSTRACT ][ OVERRIDE ]
       EVENT event-name signature-spec


   Use the following syntax to declare a class event prototype in an interface:

     DEFINE [ PUBLIC ] EVENT event-name signature-spec

Use the following syntax to declare an abstract class event prototype:

  DEFINE [ PACKAGE-PRIVATE | PROTECTED | PACKAGE-PROTECTED | PUBLIC ]
    [ OVERRIDE ] ABSTRACT
    EVENT event-name signature-spec


[ PRIVATE | PACKAGE-PRIVATE | PROTECTED | PACKAGE-PROTECTED | PUBLIC ]
           Specifies the access mode for this event. For a class event, the access mode indicates what code can
           call the Subscribe( ) event method on the event.
           Note: You can only directly publish an event from within the class where it is defined, regardless of
           its access mode.
           A PRIVATE event can have a handler subscribed to it only by the defining class. An instance can
           subscribe a handler to a private event of another instance if both instances are of the same class. A
           PACKAGE-PRIVATE event can have a handler subscribed to it by the defining class and any class
           within its package. A PROTECTED event can have a handler subscribed to it by the defining class
           and any of its derived classes. A PACKAGE-PROTECTED event can have a handler subscribed to it
           by the defining class, any class within its package, and from within any subclass that inherits the class.
           A PUBLIC event can have a handler subscribed to it from any code (in a class or a procedure) that
           has access to a class instance.
           The default access mode is PUBLIC.
           When declaring an interface event prototype, the access mode for the event must be PUBLIC (the
           default).
           When defining an abstract event, the access mode for the event cannot be PRIVATE.
           Note: The access mode modifier and the STATIC/ABSTRACT modifier can appear in either order,
           e.g., DEFINE STATIC PUBLIC event1 EVENT... is valid syntax.
[ STATIC ]
           Defines an event that is a static member of the class type for which it is defined and that is scoped to
           the ABL session where it is referenced. ABL creates one copy of the specified class static event on
           first reference to the class type, and ABL creates only one such copy for any number of instances of
           the class that you create. You can subscribe a handler for an accessible static event in any piece of
           code. You can publish a static event only in an instance or static method that is defined within the
           same class definition where the static event is defined.
           Without this option, ABL defines an instance event that is scoped to a single instance of the class
           where it is defined. ABL creates one copy of the specified instance event for each such class instance
           that you create. You can subscribe a handler for any public instance event (abstract or non-abstract)
           in any procedure, or in any instance or static method defined inside or outside of the class where the
           instance event is defined. Any static method can publish the public instance event only using an object
           reference to a class instance that defines the event as a member. If the referencing static method is
           defined in the same class as the public instance event, the class must instantiate itself in order to have
           access to an instance reference.
           You can publish a non-abstract instance event only in a method that is defined within the same class
           definition where the instance event is defined. If the method is static, the instance event must also be
           public and you can only publish it using an object reference to an instance of the class. An instance
           method defined in the same class can also publish a public instance event using an object reference to
           an instance of the class.
           For more information on the mechanism for subscribing handlers to static and instance class events,
           see the Subscribe( ) event method reference entry. Note that the same constraints on subscribing
           handlers for static and instance class events applies to unsubscribing the handlers. 

        The STATIC option is not valid when you:
        •   Define or implement an abstract event
        •   Declare an interface event prototype
        •   Implement an interface event
[ ABSTRACT ]
        Defines the event as an abstract instance member of the class type for which it is defined. The defining
        class type must also be abstract. If you define an abstract event, it has the following requirements:
        •   You must specify the OVERRIDE option if an inherited abstract event has the same name and
            signature.
            Note: Class events cannot be overloaded. If you want to define an event with a different signature,
            it must also have a different name than any other event inherited by or defined in the same class.
        •   You can specify any access mode other than PRIVATE.
        •   The abstract event must be overridden and implemented in a derived class.
        Any class definition for an instance event that includes the OVERRIDE option and does not include
        the ABSTRACT option defines an event implementation. If it also includes the ABSTRACT option,
        the inherited abstract event remains abstract.
        Note: You cannot publish an event that is defined as ABSTRACT.
        This option is not valid either when you define a static event or when you declare an interface event
        prototype.
[ OVERRIDE ]
        Specifies that this instance event overrides an abstract event inherited from an ABL or .NET class.
        Note: A .NET abstract event or class is defined in C# with the abstract keyword.
        When you specify OVERRIDE, event-name must be identical to the name of the overridden abstract
        event, and signature-spec must specify a signature that is identical to the signature defined for the
        overridden event. In addition, the access mode must not be more restrictive than the access mode
        defined for the overridden event. When overriding a .NET event, the signature-spec must specify the
        same delegate that is defined for the .NET event. 
        If you specify the ABSTRACT option, your overriding event is also defined as abstract, and it must
        be implemented in a class derived from the defining class. Note that you do not have to override an
        inherited abstract event that you want to remain abstract as long as the inheriting class is also abstract.
        However, doing so allows you to specify a less restrictive access mode for the abstract event.
        If you do not specify the ABSTRACT option, your overriding event implements the inherited abstract
        event.
        This option is not valid:
        •   When you define a static event
        •   When you declare an interface event prototype
        •   To override an inherited event that is implemented (not abstract)
EVENT event-name
        Specifies the event name. This event name must be unique among all events, properties, and variable
        data members defined in the class hierarchy of the defining class, unless you specify the OVERRIDE
        option to override an inherited abstract event.
                                                                                                   
          Note: Members of a class are grouped into six namespaces, including buffers/temp-tables, methods,
          variables/properties/events, ProDataSets, queries, and data-sources. Variables, properties, and events
          defined as members of a class share the same namespace. There can be only one class member in this
          namespace with a given name (not counting abstract member overrides).
signature-spec
          Specifies the signature for the Publish( ) event method and for any class method or internal procedure
          that executes as a handler when the event is published. You can define this signature using one of the
          two options in the following syntax:

             {     [ SIGNATURE ] VOID ( [parameter[ , parameter]...] )
                  |[ DELEGATE ][ CLASS ]dotNet-delegate-type}


          [ SIGNATURE ] VOID ( [parameter[ , parameter]...] )
          Defines an ABL method signature for the event, including the return value and zero or more parameters.
          The return value is always VOID. No associated internal procedure or method event handler can return
          a value. The SIGNATURE keyword is optional for readability.
          If this event implements an ABL interface event or overrides an inherited ABL abstract event (using
          the OVERRIDE option), the interface or inherited abstract event must also be defined with an ABL
          method signature that matches this signature. If the ABL interface or inherited ABL abstract event is
          defined with a .NET signature (dotNet-delegate-type), you must use the .NET signature option to
          define this event instead.
         
          [ DELEGATE ][ CLASS ]dotNet-delegate-type
          Defines a .NET signature for the event as specified by a .NET delegate type (dotNet-delegate-type),
          for example, System.EventHandler. You can specify the delegate class name without a namespace
          (for example, EventHandler) with the presence of an appropriate USING statement on page 1035.
          The DELEGATE or CLASS keyword is optional for readability. However the CLASS keyword, only,
          also disambiguates a delegate type name that might be identical to an ABL primitive type name. Note
          that ABL only supports .NET delegate types that conform to the .NET convention for event handlers.
          This convention defines an event handler signature with a VOID return type and two input parameters,
          where the first parameter is a System.Object and the second parameter is a System.EventArgs
          or a .NET class derived from System.EventArgs. The .NET delegate type can also be a constructed
          generic type.
          You must use this option to define the ABL class event signature if the ABL event implements a .NET
          interface event or overrides an inherited .NET abstract event (using the OVERRIDE option). Also,
          the dotNet-delegate-type for the ABL event must be identical to the .NET delegate type used to define
          the .NET interface or abstract event.
          You can use this option to define the signature for an ABL class event even if the event does not
          implement or override a .NET event. However, if this event implements an ABL interface event or
          overrides (using the OVERRIDE option) an inherited ABL abstract event that is, itself, defined with
          a .NET delegate, you must also define the signature for this event using an identical
          dotNet-delegate-type.
          Note that you can identify the data types of .NET event parameters by looking up the delegate type
          defined for the event in the appropriate .NET event documentation.

  Examples
The following sample class and procedure files define, publish, subscribe an event handler to, and unsubscribe an event
handler from an ABL class event. The r-EventPublish sample class defines the public NewCustomer event and
a PubNewCustomer( ) method to publish it.
r-EventPublish.cls

  CLASS r-EventPublish:

     /* Define an event */
     DEFINE PUBLIC EVENT NewCustomer
       SIGNATURE VOID ( INPUT pcCustName AS CHARACTER ).

     /* Code that publishes the event. */
     METHOD PUBLIC VOID PubNewCustomer( ):

       DEFINE VARIABLE cCustName AS CHARACTER INITIAL "A Customer Name" NO-UNDO.

        NewCustomer:Publish( INPUT cCustName ) NO-ERROR.

     END METHOD.

  END CLASS.


The r-EventSubscribe sample class defines and subscribes a NewCustomer( ) method as a handler for the
event when it is instantiated, based on the object reference to the r-EventPublish class that is passed to the
constructor. Note that the event handler also unsubscribes itself to the event after it executes.
r-EventSubscribe.cls

  CLASS r-EventSubscribe:

     DEFINE VARIABLE rPubObj AS CLASS r-EventPublish NO-UNDO.

     CONSTRUCTOR PUBLIC r-EventSubscribe
       ( INPUT prPubObj AS CLASS r-EventPublish):

        ASSIGN rPubObj = prPubObj.
        rPubObj:NewCustomer:Subscribe( NewCustomer_Handler ) NO-ERROR.

     END CONSTRUCTOR.

     /* Method used as event handler */
     METHOD PUBLIC VOID NewCustomer_Handler ( INPUT pcCustName AS CHARACTER ):

        MESSAGE "Subscriber received event NewCustomer" SKIP
                "CustName =" pcCustName VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.

        rPubObj:NewCustomer:Unsubscribe( NewCustomer_Handler ) NO-ERROR.

     END METHOD.

  END CLASS.


The r-EventPubSub.p sample procedure instantiates these classes. The procedure then displays a frame that includes
a bNewCust button that when clicked runs an internal procedure, which in turn invokes the PubNewCustomer( )
method on the r-EventPublish object to publish the event. This demonstrates how the class defining an event can
    allow a client class or procedure to publish it by providing a public method for the purpose. Note that any subsequent
   attempt to click the button does not run the event handler, because the handler has unsubscribed itself.
   r-EventPubSub.p

       DEFINE VARIABLE rPubObj AS CLASS r-EventPublish NO-UNDO.
       DEFINE VARIABLE rSubObj AS CLASS r-EventSubScribe NO-UNDO.

       DEFINE BUTTONbNewCust LABEL "New Customer".
       DEFINE BUTTON bQuit    LABEL "Quit".

       FORM bNewCust bQuit WITH FRAME aFrame.

       ON CHOOSE OF bNewCust RUN CallNewCust NO-ERROR.

       rPubObj = NEW r-EventPublish( ).
       rSubObj = NEW r-EventSubScribe( rPubObj ).

       ENABLE ALL WITH FRAME aFrame.
       WAIT-FOR CHOOSE OF bQuit OR WINDOW-CLOSE OF CURRENT-WINDOW.

       PROCEDURE CallNewCust:

         /* Call to publish */
         rPubObj:PubNewCustomer( ) NO-ERROR.

       END PROCEDURE.


   Notes
   •   For information on using class event handlers and the built-in event methods, including Publish( ), Subscribe( ), and
       Unsubscribe( ), and on .NET see the Class Events Reference.
   •   If you define an ABL event using a .NET delegate, .NET can only subscribe to this event if its definition implements
       or overrides an event defined in a .NET interface or abstract class.



DEFINE PROPERTY statement
   Defines a property of a class, declares a property prototype in an ABL interface, or overrides a property inherited from
   an ABL or .NET super class. A property is a named member of a class that allows you to read or write a value using the
   same syntax as a data member. However, a property can define special methods (accessors) that specify if and how the
   property can be read or written.
   Note: This statement is applicable only when used in a class or interface definition (.cls) file.

   Syntax
   Use the following syntax for defining a property that you can both read and write:

       DEFINE [ PRIVATE | PACKAGE-PRIVATE | PROTECTED | PACKAGE-PROTECTED | PUBLIC
       ]
               [ STATIC | ABSTRACT | FINAL ] [ OVERRIDE ][ SERIALIZABLE |
       NON-SERIALIZABLE ]
          PROPERTY property-name
          {{
                AS primitive-type-name|
                AS [ CLASS ]object-type-name
             } [ EXTENT [constant ] ]}
          [ INITIAL { constant | {[constant[ , constant]...]}}]
          [ SERIALIZE-NAME serialize-name ][ NO-UNDO ]
          {
                                  [accessor-access-mode] GET [implementation | SUPER
         ] .
                SET [implementation | SUPER ] .
             |
                GET [implementation | SUPER ] .
                [accessor-access-mode] SET [implementation | SUPER ] .
          }
 Use the following syntax to define a property that you can read only:

  DEFINE [ PRIVATE | PACKAGE-PRIVATE | PROTECTED | PACKAGE-PROTECTED | PUBLIC
  ]
         [ STATIC | ABSTRACT | FINAL ] [ OVERRIDE ][ NON-SERIALIZABLE ]
    PROPERTY property-name
    {{
          AS primitive-type-name|
          AS [ CLASS ]object-type-name
       }[ EXTENT [constant ]]}
    [ INITIAL { constant |{[constant[ , constant]...]}}]
    [ SERIALIZE-NAME serialize-name ][ NO-UNDO ]

     GET [implementation | SUPER ] .


Use the following syntax to define a property that you can write only:

  DEFINE [ PRIVATE | PACKAGE-PRIVATE | PROTECTED | PACKAGE-PROTECTED | PUBLIC
  ]
         [ STATIC | ABSTRACT | FINAL ] [ OVERRIDE ][ NON-SERIALIZABLE ]
    PROPERTY property-name
    {{
          AS primitive-type-name|
          AS [ CLASS ]object-type-name
       }[ EXTENT [constant ]]}
    [ INITIAL { constant |{[[ , constant]...]}}]
    [ SERIALIZE-NAME serialize-name ][ NO-UNDO ]

     SET [implementation | SUPER ] .


Use the following syntax to declare an interface property prototype:

  DEFINE [ PUBLIC ] PROPERTY property-name
    {{ AS primitive-type-name| AS [ CLASS ]object-type-name}
        [ EXTENT [constant ]][ SERIALIZE-NAME serialize-name ]
        [ NO-UNDO ]}
    { GET.
        SET.
      |
      GET.
      |
      SET. }


Use the following syntax to declare an abstract property prototype:

  DEFINE [ PACKAGE-PRIVATE | PROTECTED | PACKAGE-PROTECTED | PUBLIC ]
    ABSTRACT PROPERTY property-name
    {{ AS primitive-type-name| AS [ CLASS ]object-type-name}
        [ EXTENT [constant ]][ SERIALIZE-NAME serialize-name ]
        [ NO-UNDO ]}
    { GET.
        SET.
      |
      GET.
      |
      SET. }


[ PRIVATE | PACKAGE-PRIVATE | PROTECTED | PACKAGE-PROTECTED | PUBLIC ]
           Specifies the access mode for the property. A PRIVATE property can be accessed by the defining
           class. An instance can access a private property of another instance if both instances are of the same
           class. A PACKAGE-PRIVATE property can be accessed from within the class and any class within
           its package. A PROTECTED property can be accessed by the defining class and any of its derived
           classes. A PACKAGE-PROTECTED property can be accessed from within the class, any class within
           its package, and from within any subclass that inherits the class. A PUBLIC property can be accessed
           from any code (in a class or a procedure) that has access to a class instance.
           The default access mode is PUBLIC.
           This access mode applies to both reading and writing the property value by default. However, you can
           set a different access mode for reading or writing the property value (but not both) using an appropriate
           accessor-access-mode option to define the corresponding accessor (GET or SET).
           When declaring an interface property prototype, the access mode for the property must be PUBLIC
           (the default).
           When defining an abstract property, the access mode for the property cannot be PRIVATE.
[ STATIC ]
          Defines a property that is a static member of the class type for which it is defined and that is scoped
          to the ABL session where it is referenced. ABL creates one copy of the specified class static property
          on first reference to the class type, and ABL creates only one such copy for any number of instances
          of the class that you create. You can reference an accessible static property in any piece of code.
           Without this option, ABL defines an instance property that is scoped to a single instance of the class
           where it is defined. ABL creates one copy of the specified instance property for each such class instance
           that you create. You can reference any public instance property (non-abstract) in any procedure, or in
           any instance or static method defined inside or outside of the class where the instance property is
           defined. Any static method can reference the public instance property only using an object reference
           to a class instance that defines the property as a member. If the referencing static method is defined
           in the same class as the public instance property, the class must instantiate itself in order to have access
           to an instance reference.
          The STATIC option is not valid when you:
           •   Define or implement an abstract property
           •   Declare an interface property prototype
           •   Implement an interface property
           Note: The access mode modifier and the STATIC/ABSTRACT modifier can appear in either order,
           e.g., DEFINE STATIC PUBLIC myProperty PROPERTY... is valid syntax.

[ ABSTRACT ]
        Defines the property as an abstract member of the class type for which it is defined. The defining class
        type must also be abstract. If you define an abstract property, it has the following requirements:
            •   You must specify the OVERRIDE option if an inherited abstract property has the same name and
                data type.
            •   You can specify any access mode other than PRIVATE.
            •   The abstract property must be overridden and implemented in a derived class.
            Any class definition for an instance property that includes the OVERRIDE option and does not include
            the ABSTRACT option defines a property implementation. If it also includes the ABSTRACT option,
            the inherited abstract property remains abstract.
            This option is not valid either when you define a static property or when you declare an interface
            property prototype.
[ FINAL ]
            Indicates that this property cannot be overridden.
            This option is not valid when you define a static or abstract property or when you declare an interface
            property prototype.
[ OVERRIDE ]
        Specifies that this instance property overrides a property inherited from an ABL or .NET property.
            When you specify OVERRIDE, the property definition must match the inherited property with respect
            to name, data type (including array dimensions), specified accessors (GET or SET), and NO-UNDO
            setting. In addition, the access mode must not be more restrictive than the access mode defined for the
            overridden property. When overriding a .NET property, the data type must also map appropriately to
            the inherited .NET property data type. For more information, see the description of the
            primitive-type-name and object-type-name options.
[ SERIALIZABLE | NON-SERIALIZABLE ]
            Class-based objects that are defined as serializable (using the SERIALIZABLE option in the CLASS
            statement on page 132) can be passed as parameters in remotes call between the application server and
            ABL clients and can be serialized to binary or JSON format. By default, both passing a class as a
            parameter and serializing an object to binary via the Progress.IO.BinarySerializer class
            include all data members regardless of access mode. However, for JSON serialization via
            Progress.IO.JsonSerializer, only public data members are serialized. To include a non-public
            property during JSON serialization, SERIALIZABLE must be added to the definition. See Serialize(
            ) method (JsonSerializer) for more information.
            Use the NON-SERIALIZABLE option to exclude a given property from parameter passing between
            an application server and ABL client and from the serialization process via the
            Progress.IO.BinarySerializer or Progress.IO.JsonSerializer class. A property
            marked as NON-SERIALIZABLE is assigned its initial value when the class is deserialized.
            You can also use the NON-SERIALIZABLE option to make a class that otherwise would not be
            serializable because one or more of its members. (See the Parameter passing syntax on page 783 entry
            for full details on what can and cannot be serialized.) For example, if a property itself is a class-based
            object that is not serializable, adding the NON-SERIALIZABLE keyword to that property will allow
            the class that contains it to be defined as SERIALIZABLE.
            Note: Use the SERIALIZABLE option only with properties that are both readable and writable. This
            option is not for use with properties defined as STATIC, as ABSTRACT, or as part of an interface.
property-name
           Specifies the name of the property. The property-name must be unique among the names of all
           properties, events, and variable data members that are defined in the class and its inherited class
           hierarchy (not counting abstract member overrides) and that are accessible to the defining class (not
           defined as PRIVATE in a super class).

            Note: Members of a class are grouped into six namespaces, including buffers/temp-tables, methods,
            variables/properties/events, ProDataSets, queries, and data-sources. Variables, properties, and events
            defined as members of a class share the same namespace. There can be only one class member in this
            namespace with a given name (not counting abstract member overrides).
            You can reference this name from outside the property definition in order to read a value from or write
            a value to the property. You can reference this name from inside the property definition (in a GET or
            SET accessor) in order to read or write the value of the default memory for the property, according to
            its data type.
            Note: If the property is defined in a class that is derived from a .NET class, other restrictions on
            property-name apply. For more information, see the CLASS statement on page 132 reference entry.
AS primitive-type-name
           Specifies a built-in primitive type (primitive-type-name) and an optional initial value (constant) for
           the default memory of the property. The built-in data type can be one of the following:

              CHARACTER | COM-HANDLE | DATE | DATETIME | DATETIME-TZ
               | DECIMAL | HANDLE | INT64 | INTEGER| LOGICAL | LONGCHAR
               | MEMPTR | RAW | RECID | ROWID | AS-data-type


            If you are overriding a .NET abstract property or implementing a property defined in a .NET interface,
            primitive-type-name must specify the exact same .NET mapped data type that is defined for the
            corresponding .NET property. For a .NET mapped data type that is a default match for a given ABL
            primitive type, you must use the default matching ABL data type, as shown in Table 24: Implicit
            mappings between .NET and ABL data types on page 266. (For example, INTEGER indicates a .NET
            System.Int32.) For a .NET mapped data type that is not a default match for one of the ABL primitive
            types, ABL provides a data type keyword (AS-data-type) that you must use to explicitly indicate the
            required .NET data type, as shown in Table 25: Explicit mappings between ABL and .NET data types
            on page 269. (For example, the AS data type, UNSIGNED-BYTE, indicates a .NET System.Byte.)
            Note: At run time, a property defined using an AS-data-type keyword behaves in ABL like the
            corresponding ABL primitive type. Explicit mappings between ABL and .NET
            data types on page 269. 
            Note: To manage public access for a complex data type that cannot be specified for a property, you
            can define both a data member of that complex type and a separate public method that passes the
            complex type as a parameter.
AS [ CLASS ]object-type-name
         Specifies an object reference with the data type of a class or interface for the default memory of the
         property. The default value of the property is the Unknown value (?). You cannot assign an initial
         value using the INITIAL option.
         object-type-name
         Specifies the type name of an ABL or .NET class or interface. Specify an object type name using the
         syntax described in the Type-name syntax on page 1011 reference entry. With an appropriate USING
         statement on page 1035, you can also specify a class or interface name alone, without the qualifying
         package or namespace.

           You cannot directly specify the type name of a .NET mapped object type (such as System.Int32). To
           define a property that matches a .NET mapped type, you must define it as the corresponding ABL
           primitive type (primitive-type-name).
           If you are overriding a .NET abstract property or implementing a property defined in a .NET interface,
           object-type-name must specify the exact same .NET object type as the corresponding interface property.
           However, for .NET inner (nested) type, note the difference in the ABL syntax, which replaces the
           corresponding period (.) in the .NET object type with a plus (+) (see the Type-name syntax on page
           1011 reference entry).
           Also note that when implementing a .NET array property, you must specify the exact .NET array
           object type (for example, "System.Drawing.Point[]"); you cannot use an ABL array equivalent
           (such as System.Drawing.Point EXTENT).
           CLASS
           If the specified class or interface type name conflicts with an abbreviation of a built-in primitive type
           name, such as INT for INTEGER, you must specify the CLASS keyword.
           For more information on object references, see the Class-based object reference on page 127 reference
           entry.
[ EXTENT [ constant ]]
        Defines the property as an array of data elements, where the element data type is specified by either
        the AS primitive-type-name option or the AS object-type-name option. This option can specify an
        array property as either determinate (has a defined number of elements) or indeterminate (has an
        undefined number of elements). To define a determinate array property, specify the EXTENT option
        with the constant argument. This optional argument is an integer value that represents the number of
        elements in the property array. To define an indeterminate array property, specify the EXTENT option
        without the constant argument.
           The EXTENT is part of the property data type. For more information, see the Type-name syntax on
           page 1011 reference entry.
           For more information about arrays, see Work with one-dimensional arrays in Basic ABL.
           If you do not use the EXTENT option (or you specify constant as 0), the property is not an array
           property.
[ INITIAL {constant| [ constant[ , constant] . . . ] }]
          The initial value of the property you want to define. If you use the AS primitive-type-name option and
          you do not use the INITIAL constant option, the initial value is the default initial value for the data
          type of the variable or array element.
           When you define an array property, you can supply initial values for each element in the array. For
           example:

              DEFINE PUBLIC PROPERTY pbarray-var AS AS CHARACTER EXTENT 3
              INITIAL ["Add","Delete","Update"]
                    GET.
                    SET.


           If you do not supply enough values to fill up the elements of the array, the AVM puts the last value
           you named into the remaining elements of the array. If you supply too many values, the AVM raises
           an error.
           If you define a property as an indeterminate array, and you supply initial values for elements in the
           array, the AVM sets the number of elements and treats the array as a determinate array.
           The INITIAL option is not valid either when you define an abstract property or when you declare an
           interface property prototype.

            The following table lists the default initial values for the various property data types.
            Table 33: Default variable initial values

            Data type                                Default initial value
            CHARACTER                                "" (an empty string)
                       *, **
            CLASS                                    Unknown value (?)
            COM-HANDLE**                             Unknown value (?)
            DATE                                     Unknown value (?) (displays as blanks)
            DATETIME                                 Unknown value (?)
            DATETIME-TZ                              Unknown value (?)
            DECIMAL                                  0
            HANDLE**                                 Unknown value (?)
            INT64                                    0
            INTEGER                                  0
            LOGICAL                                  no
            LONGCHAR                                 Unknown value (?)
                          **
            MEMPTR                                   A zero-length sequence of bytes
                  **
            RAW                                      A zero-length sequence of bytes
            RECID                                    Unknown value (?)
            ROWID**                                  Unknown value (?)


            * If you display a class instance using the MESSAGE statement on page 694, ABL automatically
            invokes the ToString( ) method (Object) (provided by the Progress.Lang.Object class) on the object
            reference. To display a class instance in a frame (for example, using the DISPLAY statement on page
            450), you must first explicitly convert the object reference to a displayable type using the INT64 function
            on page 641, the INTEGER function on page 643, the STRING function on page 968, or the ToString(
            ) method (Object).
            ** You cannot use the INITIAL option to specify an initial value for this data type as part of the
            property definition.
SERIALIZE-NAME serialize-name
        An optional CHARACTER constant that specifies the name of the property as it should appear when
        serialized into JSON. The default is property-name. Use this option when the serialized name contains
        invalid characters for an ABL name, is an ABL keyword, or an invalid JSON property name.
            This option cannot be used if the property is defined as NON-SERIALIZABLE or the class that
            contains it is not defined as SERIALIZABLE.
[ NO-UNDO ]
        When the value of a property is changed during a transaction and the transaction is undone, the AVM
        restores the value of the property to its prior value. If you do not want, or if you do not need, the value
        of such a property to be undone even when it has been changed during a transaction, use the NO-UNDO
        option. NO-UNDO properties are more efficient; use this option whenever possible.
[ accessor-access-mode ]
          Specifies the access mode for the immediately following accessor (GET or SET). The possible access
          modes include:

              PACKAGE-PROTECTED | PROTECTED | PACKAGE-PRIVATE | PRIVATE


          To use an accessor-access-mode with accessors:
          •   You must define at least one accessor (GET or SET) that defaults to the access mode of the property.
              Therefore, if you define only one accessor, you cannot specify a separate accessor-access-mode
              for it.
          •   If you define two accessors, you can specify an accessor-access-mode for one of the accessors,
              but only if this accessor-access-mode is more restrictive than the access mode of the property.
          •   If you are defining an abstract property, you cannot specify the PRIVATE access mode for an
              accessor.
          For example, if the property access mode is PUBLIC, any accessor-access-mode that you specify
          must be PACKAGE-PROTECTED, PROTECTED, PACKAGE-PRIVATE, or PRIVATE; if the property
          access mode is PROTECTED, any accessor-access-mode that you specify must be PRIVATE, unless
          the property is abstract.
GET [ implementation | SUPER ] .
          An accessor (GET) that defines the property as readable. If you do not define a GET accessor for a
          class property, the property cannot be read, not even from within the defining class.
          It is valid to omit the GET accessor when defining a property for an interface. It is then up to the class
          implementing the interface to decide whether to define the GET accessor for the property or not.
          However, as stated above, if you do not define a GET accessor for a class property, the property cannot
          be read. If you do not define a GET accessor, then you must define a SET accessor.
          You can define a GET accessor using three basic forms:

           Without an implementation
                                               GET.

           With the SUPER option
                                               GET SUPER.

           With an implementation
                                               GET ( [array-index-parameter] ) : get-logic
                                               END [ GET ].


          If you are defining an abstract property or an interface property prototype, you cannot define the GET
          accessor with an implementation or with the SUPER option.
          Syntax for GET accessor without an implementation

              GET.


          Without an implementation, an operation that reads the property directly accesses the current value in
          the property's default memory.
          If the property is an array, the default accessor implementation handles the subscript references
          automatically. Providing an array-index-parameter in this case is a compiler error.
          Syntax for a GET accessor with the SUPER option


              GET SUPER.

          SUPER allows you to pass control to the super class. Use the SUPER option if you want to override
          one of the accessors to provide extra processing or validation, but don't need to change the
          implementation of the other accessor. You can also use SUPER to make the access mode of the property
          less restrictive.
          Syntax for a GET accessor with an implementation

            GET ( [array-index-parameter] ) : get-logic
            END [ GET ] .


          array-index-parameter
          Specifies an INPUT parameter that provides access to the index value of the current element of an
          array property from within the get-logic. When a property is defined as an array using the EXTENT
          option, the GET accessor references the single element of the property array. The array-index-parameter
          specifies the subscript value for the element being accessed. This is the syntax:

            [ INPUT ] array-index-name AS { INTEGER | INT64 }


          array-index-name
          Specifies the name of the INPUT parameter that provides the subscript value (index) for this array
          element. You must use this value in a subscript on the property name (property-name[
          array-index-name ]) to access the default memory for the current array element.
          INTEGER | INT64
          Specifies the data type of the index. Use the data type that supports the largest dimension that is defined
          for or that you expect to be fixed for the property array at run time.
          Where supported, an unsubscripted array reference is a reference to the whole array. For a property
          array, an unsubscripted read reference invokes the GET accessor for each array element in ascending
          order by subscript value.
          get-logic
          Can contain ABL code that executes for any operation that reads the property from outside its own
          GET accessor definition. This code can include any ABL statements that are valid in a method of a
          class, including CATCH and FINALLY blocks. However, if you define the property itself as static,
          you cannot access any instance members of classes (including the defining class) or use the SUPER
          and THIS-OBJECT system references; you can only access static class members and the local data
          elements of the GET accessor. The actual value that you return from the property is entirely dependent
          on your get-logic code. Within get-logic, any operation that reads from property-name (such as the
          right-hand side of an assignment) directly reads the value of the property's default memory. However,
          any operation that writes to property-name within get-logic invokes the property's own SET accessor
          to assign the value, exactly like writing the property from outside of its own definition. If the SET
          accessor is defined with an implementation, that implementation determines how the value is written
          to the property.
          You do not have to use the property's default memory to provide the value read from a property. You
          can also use any other accessible data, such as a data member, as storage to access property values.
          To return a value from get-logic to any outside reader of the property, you must return a value with
          the correct data type using the RETURN statement on page 889 (similar to any method that returns a
          value). If you do not invoke the RETURN statement in get-logic, the property returns the Unknown
          value (?).
SET [ implementation | SUPER ] .
          An accessor (SET) that defines the property as writable. If you do not define a SET accessor, the
          property cannot be written, not even from within the defining class.
          You can define a SET accessor using three basic forms:

Without an implementation
                                     SET.

With the SUPER option
                                     SET SUPER.

With an implementation
                                     SET ( [array-index-parameter] ) : set-logic
                                     END [ SET ].


It is valid to omit the SET accessor when defining a property for an interface. It is then up to the class
implementing the interface to decide whether to define the SET accessor for the property or not.
However, as stated above, if you do not define a SET accessor for a class property, the property cannot
be written. If you do not define a SET accessor, then you must define a GET accessor.
If you are defining an abstract property or an interface property prototype, you cannot define the SET
accessor with an implementation.
Syntax for a SET accessor without an implementation

  SET.


Without an implementation, any operation that writes the property writes the value directly to the
property's default memory. If the property is an array, the default accessor implementation handles
the subscript references automatically.
Note: This is equivalent to, but more efficient than, using an implementation to explicitly assign a
value to a property.
Syntax for a SET accessor with the SUPER option

  SET SUPER.


SUPER allows you to pass control to the super class. Use the SUPER option if you want to override
one of the accessors to provide extra processing or validation, but don't need to change the
implementation of the other accessor. You can also use SUPER to make the access mode of the property
less restrictive.
Syntax for a SET accessor with an implementation

  SET ( parameter-definition[ , array-index-parameter] ) :
    set-logic
  END [ SET ] .


parameter-definition
Specifies an INPUT parameter that provides access to the value written to the property from within
the set-logic. The set-logic can contain ABL code that executes for any operation that writes to the
property from outside its own SET accessor definition. This code can include any ABL statements
that are valid in a method of a class, including CATCH and FINALLY blocks. However, if you define
the property itself as static, you cannot access any instance members of classes (including the defining
class) or use the SUPER and THIS-OBJECT system references; you can only access static class
           members and the local data elements of the SET accessor. To access the value being written to the
           property, specify parameter-definition using the following syntax:

              [ INPUT ] parameter-name AS
                {primitive-type-name|[ CLASS ]object-type-name}


           [ INPUT ] parameter-name
           Specifies the name of the INPUT parameter that you reference in set-logic to obtain the value written
           to the property.
           AS {primitive-type-name|[ CLASS ]object-type-name}
           Specifies the data type of the parameter as a built-in primitive type (primitive-type-name), or as a
           built-in or user-defined object type (object-type-name). You must specify exactly the same data type
           as you have defined for the property.
           array-index-parameter
           Specifies an INPUT parameter that provides access to the index value of the current element of an
           array property from within the set-logic. When a property is defined as an array using the EXTENT
           option, the SET accessor references a single element of the property array. The array-index-parameter
           specifies the subscript value for the element being accessed. This is the syntax:

              [ INPUT ] array-index-name AS { INTEGER | INT64 }


           array-index-name
           Specifies the name of the INPUT parameter that provides the subscript value (index) for this array
           element. You must use this value in a subscript on the property name (property-name[
           array-index-name ]) to access the default memory for the current array element.
           INTEGER | INT64
           Specifies the data type of the index. Use the data type that supports the largest dimension that is defined
           for or that you expect to be fixed for the property array at run time.
           Where supported, an unsubscripted array reference is a reference to the whole array. For a property
           array, an unsubscripted write reference invokes the SET accessor for each array element in ascending
           order by subscript value.
           set-logic
           Can contain ABL code that accesses the value written to the property as parameter-name, then uses
           parameter-name (if you choose) to set the new value for the property. The actual value that you use
           to set the property is entirely dependent on your set-logic code. Within set-logic, any operation that
           writes to property-name (such as the left-hand side of an assignment) directly writes the specified
           value to the property's default memory. However, any operation that reads from property-name within
           set-logic invokes the property's own GET accessor to read the value, exactly like reading the property
           from outside of its own definition. If the GET accessor is defined with an implementation, that
           implementation determines the value that is read from the property.
           You do not have to use the property's default memory to store the property value. You can use any
           other accessible data, such as a data member, as storage to store property values. If you do not write
           a value to property-name within set-logic, the property's default memory retains whatever value it had
           prior to any operation that writes to the property.

Examples
The examples that follow show two different ways to access the same private data of a class using properties.
The first example, shows a class (r-DefineProperties1) that defines a PUBLIC property
(cCurrentSalesRepName) followed by a procedure that accesses this property. The property is defined with two
accessors without implementations, providing direct access to the property value. The GET accessor is PUBLIC, but
the SET accessor is PRIVATE, allowing only the class or an instance of the class to set the property value. In this case,
the class sets the property from data (RepName field) in the Sports2020 database provided by a buffer (bSalesRep),
which is PRIVATE.
The class also provides a PUBLIC method (getNextSalesRep( )) to read the SalesRep table one record at a
time and set the cCurrentSalesRepName property to the value of the RepName field for each record. This PUBLIC
method also uses a PRIVATE method (restartSalesRep( )) to reset the record position to the beginning of the
table, based on an INPUT parameter. The class constructor also uses this PRIVATE method to initialize the record
buffer to the first record in the table. The class sets the cCurrentSalesRepName property to the Unknown value
(?) if the SalesRep table is empty or getNextSalesRep( ) reaches the end of the SalesRep table.
r-DefineProperties1.cls

  CLASS r-DefineProperties1:

     DEFINE PUBLIC PROPERTY cCurrentSalesRepName AS CHARACTER NO-UNDO
       GET.
       PRIVATE SET.
     DEFINE PRIVATE BUFFER bSalesRep FOR SalesRep.

     CONSTRUCTOR PUBLIC r-DefineProperties1 ():
       restartSalesRep() NO-ERROR.
       IF ERROR-STATUS:ERROR THEN RETURN ERROR ERROR-STATUS:GET-MESSAGE(1).
     END CONSTRUCTOR.

     METHOD PRIVATE VOID restartSalesRep ():
       FIND FIRST bSalesRep NO-ERROR.
       IF NOT AVAILABLE bSalesRep THEN DO:
         cCurrentSalesRepName = ?.
         RETURN ERROR "SalesRep table empty".
       END.
       ELSE
         cCurrentSalesRepName = bSalesRep.RepName.
     END METHOD.

     METHOD PUBLIC VOID getNextSalesRep (INPUT lRestart AS LOGICAL):
       IF lRestart THEN DO:
         restartSalesRep() NO-ERROR.
         IF NOT AVAILABLE bSalesRep THEN
            RETURN ERROR ERROR-STATUS:GET-MESSAGE (1).
       END.
       ELSE DO:
         FIND NEXT bSalesRep NO-ERROR.
         IF NOT AVAILABLE bSalesRep THEN
            cCurrentSalesRepName = ?.
         ELSE
            cCurrentSalesRepName = bSalesRep.RepName.
       END.
     END METHOD.

  END CLASS.


The following procedure (r-runDefineProperties1.p) instantiates the r-DefineProperties1 class,
referenced by clProps, and reads and displays the value of the clProps:cCurrentSalesRepName property in
a message, starting with the first SalesRep record found as part of class instantiation. The procedure then displays
the value of clProps:cCurrentSalesRepName in a message for each record found by the
clProps:getNextSalesRep( ) method, restarting from the beginning of the SalesRep table at the direction
of the user.

r-runDefineProperties1.p

  DEFINE VARIABLE clProps AS CLASS r-DefineProperties1 NO-UNDO.

  clProps = NEW r-DefineProperties1() NO-ERROR.
  IF ERROR-STATUS:ERROR THEN DO:
    MESSAGE ERROR-STATUS:GET-MESSAGE(1) VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.
    QUIT.
  END.

  DO WHILE NOT clProps:cCurrentSalesRepName = ?:
    MESSAGE"The current sales rep is "
       clProps:cCurrentSalesRepName + ". Continue?"
       VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX QUESTION BUTTONS YES-NO UPDATE lContinue AS LOGICAL.
    IF NOT lContinue THEN LEAVE.
    ELSE DO:
       clProps:getNextSalesRep(FALSE).
       IF clProps:cCurrentSalesRepName = ? THEN DO:
         MESSAGE "End of sales rep list. Restart?"
            VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX QUESTION BUTTONS YES-NO
            UPDATE lRestart AS LOGICAL.
         IF lRestart THEN
            clProps:getNextSalesRep(TRUE).
       END.
    END.
  END.


In the next example, the r-DefineProperties2 class defines a PUBLIC property (cNextSalesRepName) that
provides the same data as the cCurrentSalesRepName property defined by the r-DefineProperties1 class.
However, the GET accessor of the cNextSalesRepName property is also used to provide the same access to the
SalesRep table that the getNextSalesRep( ) method provides for the r-DefineProperties1 class. So,
the value of cNextSalesRepName changes with each access.
                                                                                                 
r-DefineProperties2.cls

  CLASS r-DefineProperties2:

     DEFINE PUBLIC PROPERTY lSalesRepRestart AS LOGICAL NO-UNDO
       PRIVATE GET.
       SET.
     DEFINE PRIVATE BUFFER bSalesRep FOR SalesRep.

     DEFINE PUBLIC PROPERTY cNextSalesRepName AS CHARACTER
       GET ():
         IF lSalesRepRestart THEN DO:
           restartSalesRep() NO-ERROR.
           IF NOT AVAILABLE(bSalesRep) THEN
              RETURN ERROR ERROR-STATUS:GET-MESSAGE(1).
         END.
         ELSE DO:
           FIND NEXT bSalesRep NO-ERROR.
           IF NOT AVAILABLE(bSalesRep) THEN
              cNextSalesRepName = ?.
           ELSE
              cNextSalesRepName = bSalesRep.RepName.
         END.
         RETURN cNextSalesRepName.
       END GET.
       PRIVATE SET.

     CONSTRUCTOR PUBLIC r-DefineProperties2
       (OUTPUT cFirstSalesRepName AS CHARACTER):
       ASSIGN
         lSalesRepRestart   = TRUE
         cFirstSalesRepName = cNextSalesRepName.
     END CONSTRUCTOR.

     METHOD PRIVATE VOID restartSalesRep ():
       lSalesRepRestart = FALSE.
       FIND FIRST bSalesRep NO-ERROR.
       IF NOT AVAILABLE bSalesRep THEN DO:
         cNextSalesRepName = ?.
         RETURN ERROR "SalesRep table is empty".
       END.
       ELSE
         cNextSalesRepName = bSalesRep.RepName.
     END METHOD.

  END CLASS.


Because this cNextSalesRepName property incorporates the record access provided by the getNextSalesRep( )
method, the following procedure that accesses the cNextSalesRepName property must also use the property in a
manner similar to how the r-runDefineProperties1.p procedure uses the getNextSalesRep( ) method.
As a result, the class also provides a second, publicly writable property (lSalesRepRestart) to indicate when the
reading of SalesRep records must restart from the beginning of the table. (Note that the getNextSalesRep( )
method provides its own INPUT parameter to indicate whether to restart record reading.)
Finally, the r-DefineProperties2 class constructor sets lSalesRepRestart together with an initial read of
the cNextSalesRepName property in order to initialize the record buffer to the first record of the table and pass the
associated RepName field value to the instantiating procedure as an OUTPUT parameter.
Thus, the following procedure (r-runDefineProperties2.p) instantiates the r-DefineProperties2 class,
referenced by clProps, and reads and displays the data from the clProps:cNextSalesRepName property in a
manner similar to how the r-runDefineProperties1.p procedure reads and displays the same data using the
getNextSalesRep( ) method. However, because the clProps:cNextSalesRepName property always returns
the RepName field for the next SalesRep record in the table, the r-runDefineProperties2.p procedure must
provide a separate variable (cCurrentSalesRepName) of its own, which provides the same function that the
cCurrentSalesRepName property provides for the r-DefineProperties1 class, which is to maintain a current
value read from the RepName field.
r-runDefineProperties2.p

  DEFINE VARIABLE clProps              AS CLASS r-DefineProperties2 NO-UNDO.
  DEFINE VARIABLE cCurrentSalesRepName AS CHARACTER NO-UNDO.

  clProps = NEW r-DefineProperties2(OUTPUT cCurrentSalesRepName) NO-ERROR.

  DO WHILE NOT cCurrentSalesRepName = ?:
    MESSAGE "The current sales rep is " cCurrentSalesRepName + ".                         Continue?"
       VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX QUESTION BUTTONS YES-NO
       UPDATE lContinue AS LOGICAL.
    IF NOT lContinue THEN LEAVE.
    ELSE DO:
       cCurrentSalesRepName = clProps:cNextSalesRepName.
       IF cCurrentSalesRepName = ? THEN DO:
         MESSAGE "End of sales rep list. Restart?"
            VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX QUESTION BUTTONS YES-NO
            UPDATE lRestart AS LOGICAL.
         IF lRestart THEN
            ASSIGN
              clProps:lSalesRepRestart = TRUE
              cCurrentSalesRepName      = clProps:cNextSalesRepName.
       END.
    END.
  END.


Thus, the logic of the r-runDefineProperties2.p procedure is almost identical to the
r-runDefineProperties1.p procedure, reading a clProps:cNextSalesRepName property instead of
invoking a clProps:getNextSalesRep( ) method in order to read an appropriate value from the SalesRep
table.
Example of overriding a property

  CLASS class1:
    DEFINE PROTECTED PROPERTY myProp AS INT GET. SET.
  END CLASS.

  CLASS class2 INHERITS class1:
       DEFINE PUBLIC OVERRIDE PROPERTY myProp AS INT
       GET SUPER.
       SET(INPUT pValue AS INT).
         /* default value to 10 if smaller */
         IF pValue < 10 THEN
           pValue = 10.
         SUPER:myProp = pValue.
     END SET.
   END CLASS.





Notes
•   You cannot define a property within a procedure (internal or external) or within a method of a class (constructor or
    destructor). It can only be defined as a member of a class or as a prototype in an interface. 
•   PUBLIC, PACKAGE-PROTECTED, PROTECTED, and PACKAGE-PRIVATE properties defined within a class
    definition (.cls) file maintain their characteristics throughout the inherited class hierarchy. Thus, you cannot
    override properties in a subclass that are defined in a super class.
•   You must define at least one GET or SET accessor, or define both accessors, for the property to be valid.
•   You never invoke the GET and SET accessors defined for a property directly. These methods are only invoked
    implicitly when you read (GET) or write (SET) the value of the property.  As an alternative, you can define a method in a class to
    read or write the value of a data member that you separately define in the same class.
•   If the property name is an ABL reserved keyword, you might need to use the THIS-OBJECT system reference or Type-name syntax to reference the property. •   To avoid any unexpected performance impact when using the property, ensure that the body of any GET or SET
    accessor minimizes processing that might incur delay when referencing the property.
•   You cannot specify formatting information in a property definition. You can control property formatting using the
    same default rules for formatting a variable or data member:
    1. Rely on the default formatting for the data type of the property. 
    2. Add formatting information when you access the property in a statement (for example, using a DISPLAY statement
       on page 450).
•   You can handle application errors in an a property accessor as in any ABL block. By executing a RETURN ERROR
    action at the block level or a THROW action at the block level with the presence of a ROUTINE-LEVEL ON ERROR
    UNDO, THROW statement, the AVM returns the ERROR condition to the statement that references the
    property and works much like an error raised by a method. If a RETURN ERROR also includes the option to return
    a character string value, or you set the ReturnValue property of a Progess.Lang.AppError object that you THROW,
    you can get this value using the RETURN-VALUE function on page 891 following the statement that references the
    property or in a CATCH block that catches the Progress.Lang.AppError object. If the body of an accessor contains
    an UNDO block, any unhandled ERROR condition in that block undoes only the data within that block, according to
    the NO-UNDO setting of the data. The property value, itself, is not undone unless the property is defined without
    NO-UNDO. For more information, see Develop Object-oriented ABL Applications.
•   If ERROR is raised during execution of an Assignment (=) statement, the value on the left-hand side
    usually remains unchanged from its value prior to the assignment. However, if the left-hand side of the assignment
    is a property and its SET accessor invokes the RETURN ERROR statement (raising ERROR on the assignment), the
    value of the property can be changed. This is because the SET accessor is a method, and like all methods that raise
    ERROR, any data elements that the SET accessor changes retain their most recent values after ERROR is raised.
    Thus, if the SET accessor changes the property value before invoking RETURN ERROR, the property retains its
    most recent change in value after ERROR is raised on the assignment.
•   If an ABL property that implements a property defined in a .NET interface is accessed from .NET and it raises
    ERROR out of the accessor block, ABL returns a .NET System.Exception to the caller. If the error is raised by
    executing a RETURN ERROR with the optional error string, the Message property of the System.Exception describes
    the operation where the error occurred, but the error string is available only to the ABL session, using the
    RETURN-VALUE function. If the error is raised by executing a RETURN ERROR with an optional ABL error object
    or by executing an UNDO, THROW, the System.Exception Message property includes both a description of the
    operation where the error occurred and any messages from the ABL error object. If the error is fatal, the AVM
    responds as for any ABL class, generating a protrace file and exiting the session.


DELETE OBJECT statement
   Deletes an object such as a widget, a procedure, a server, a socket, or an instance of a class. Deleting the object causes
   all allocated resources associated with the object to be returned to the system (except when otherwise noted).

   Syntax

     DELETE OBJECT { handle|object-reference}[ NO-ERROR ]


   handle
               A handle to an ABL handle-based object. The handle argument must be a variable of type HANDLE
               and must contain a valid handle.
               If the handle parameter refers to a widget, the DELETE OBJECT statement is a synonym for the
               DELETE WIDGET statement.
               If the handle parameter refers to a persistent procedure handle or proxy procedure handle, the DELETE
               OBJECT statement is a synonym for the DELETE PROCEDURE statement. This statement deletes a
               local persistent procedure handle immediately. For a proxy procedure handle, this statement deletes
               the handle immediately unless there is an outstanding asynchronous request on this handle
               (handle:ASYNC-REQUEST-COUNT is greater than zero (0)). If handle:ASYNC-REQUEST-COUNT
               is greater than zero (0), this statement raises the ERROR condition. Otherwise, the statement also sends
               a request to the application server to delete the corresponding remote persistent procedure on the
               application server. If the application server is executing any asynchronous requests ahead of it, the
               AVM queues the delete request (as with any asynchronous remote request) until the application server
               is available to handle it.
               Note: This same behavior occurs if the remote procedure deletes itself (using
               DELETE...THIS-PROCEDURE) on the application server.
               If the handle parameter refers to a server handle, the DELETE OBJECT statement:
               •   Checks that the handle parameter refers to a valid server handle, and that the handle parameter's
                   CONNECTED attribute is FALSE (no application server is connected to it). If one of these checks
                   fails, the statement raises the ERROR condition.
               •   Deletes the handle immediately, if the server handle is valid, unless there is an outstanding
                   asynchronous request on this handle (handle:ASYNC-REQUEST-COUNT is greater than zero (0)).
                   If there is an outstanding asynchronous request, this statement raises the ERROR condition.
               Deleting a server handle removes the handle from the server handle chain of the SESSION system
               handle, and resets SESSION:FIRST-SERVER and SESSION:LAST-SERVER if necessary. This
               also deletes all of the asynchronous request handles associated with the server and then deletes the
               server object.
               If handle refers to an asynchronous request handle, the DELETE OBJECT statement takes one of the
               following actions:
               •   If the handle:COMPLETE attribute is FALSE, it raises the ERROR condition.
               •   If the handle:COMPLETE attribute is TRUE, it removes handle from the chain of asynchronous
                   request handles referenced by the FIRST-ASYNC-REQUEST and the LAST-ASYNC-REQUEST
                   attributes of the server handle, and deletes handle.
               If this is a socket handle, the application must disconnect the socket from a port using the
               DISCONNECT( ) method before a socket object can be deleted. The DELETE OBJECT statement
               raises ERROR if an application deletes a socket object that is still associated with a port.
               If this is a server socket handle, the application must call DISABLE-CONNECTIONS( ) before a
               server socket object can be deleted. The DELETE OBJECT statement raises ERROR if an application
               deletes a server socket object that is still listening for connections.

            Where handle refers to a dynamic buffer, it is recommended practice to execute the DELETE OBJECT
            statement at the same level (that is, as part of the same sub-transaction) as the transaction that created
            the buffer.
object-reference
            An object reference to a class instance. The object reference argument must be an ABL object reference
            variable, such as one defined using the VAR statement, DEFINE VARIABLE statement
            , or the DEFINE PARAMETER statement  with the CLASS option, and it must
            contain a valid object reference.
            Note: You can validate an object reference by using the VALID-OBJECT function on page 1040.
            When you delete a class instance, the AVM invokes the destructor for the class and the destructor for
            each class in its inherited class hierarchy, if any. The destructor can be used for freeing resources
            allocated to the object when the object is deleted. At this time, the object context goes out of scope.
            In addition, the object is removed from the list of valid ABL class instances (session object chain)
            referenced by the FIRST-OBJECT attribute or LAST-OBJECT attribute of the SESSION system
            handle.
            If you do not delete a class instance and you have not turned off automatic garbage collection using
            the No Garbage Collection (-nogc) startup parameter, the instance is deleted when there are no more
            references to it.
            OpenEdge includes a performance tuning feature for ABL class-based applications that controls how
            the AVM deletes objects. The Re-usable Objects Cache (-reusableObjects) startup parameter
            specifies the number of deleted class objects that the AVM stores for later re-initialization. By default,
            -reusableObjects is set to 25. When you use -reusableObjects, the AVM transfers the
            deleted object for most ABL classes to a re-usable objects cache. If your application causes the AVM
            to instantiate the same class later, the stored object is re-initialized and removed from the cache. The
            re-initialized object has a new UUID and the same initial data as a new instance of the class. The re-use
            of the object saves much of the overhead of instantiating a class.
            Note: The cache does not store .NET classes, .NET-derived ABL classes, classes with static elements,
            or classes compiled during your session.
NO-ERROR
            The NO-ERROR option is used to prevent the statement from raising ERROR and displaying
            error messages.

Notes
•   When a temp-table object is passed as a table-handle output parameter, the deletion of the object following the
    DELETE OBJECT statement is postponed until the procedure goes out of scope. When the procedure returns, the
    table-handle is created, receives a copy of the original temp-table, and is then returned.
•   The OUTPUT TABLE-HANDLE parameter creates a temp-table in the target procedure, which is added to the
    SESSION widget-pool. You must use the DELETE OBJECT statement to delete this temp-table when it is no longer
    needed, or you will create a memory leak.
•   When a dataset-handle parameter is passed BY-REFERENCE, you are not allowed to delete the dataset object on
    the caller procedure. If you do, an ERROR is raised (unless NO-ERROR is specified).
•   Using automatic garbage collection (the default), the AVM deletes each class instance when no references to the
    object exist other than on the session object chain (accessible using the FIRST-OBJECT attribute or LAST-OBJECT
    attribute of the SESSION system handle). When a class instance is garbage collected, its destructor runs as if you
    deleted the object using DELETE OBJECT. As with DELETE OBJECT, automatic garbage collection stores the
    deleted object in a re-usable object cache.
•   If you use DELETE OBJECT on an object reference but there is still another reference to that object, the other
    reference becomes invalid. Therefore, unless you are sure that the object is no longer needed, it is best to allow
    garbage collection to delete class-based objects. You just need to be sure that any reference no longer needed is set
    to the Unknown value (?), or will naturally go out of scope.

•   Garbage collection does not occur when there is a circular reference (for example, object A has a reference to object
    B and object B has a reference to object A). In this case, a link in the chain needs to be broken in order for garbage
    collection to free the objects involved. To break the chain, set one of the references to the Unknown value (?) or use
    DELETE OBJECT on the reference. But again, this is not appropriate if there are other references that need to remain
    valid.
    There are other ways to create a circular reference, that do not only involves classes. One case is when a procedure
    (or class) instantiates a class object that then binds to a temp-table or dataset (via the BIND option) in the procedure.
    In this case, there is circular dependency: the procedure holds a reference to the class instance, and the class instance
    depends on the temp-table or dataset from the procedure (via the BIND option). The application code needs to break
    that circular reference before being able to delete the objects. Another situation that can cause circular references is
    a class that subscribes to an event in another class, if the class that has the event also has a reference to the class that
    subscribed to the event. In this case, make sure you unsubscribe from the event when done with it.
•   You can turn off automatic garbage collection using the No Garbage Collection (-nogc) startup parameter. However,
    if you do so, you must decide when to use this statement to delete each class instance you no longer need. Furthermore,
    a class instance that has no other references still remains in memory. You must locate it by walking the session object
    chain and then delete it.
•   The Re-usable Object Cache (-reusableObjects) startup parameter controls how many deleted class-based
    objects are cached. By default, the parameter is set to 25. You can disable this feature by setting the parameter value
    to zero. When the cache is full and you delete another object, the AVM uses a least-recently used scheme to make
    room in the cache.
•   The AVM only uses an object in the re-usable object cache to re-instantiate the same class. It cannot use an object
    to instantiate another class in the same inheritance hierarchy. For example, Class B inherits Class A and is inherited
    by Class C. If the cache contains an instance of Class B, the AVM cannot use that object to help instantiate either
    an instance of Class A or Class C. The AVM can only use that object for a new instance of Class B.
•   If you invoke DELETE OBJECT from within a class constructor, specifying the THIS-OBJECT system reference
    for object-reference, class instantiation stops, and the AVM invokes the destructor for the instantiating
    class and for each class in its class hierarchy where the constructor has already completed execution. After all
    destructors have completed, control returns to the statement following the statement that instantiated the class using
    the NEW function (classes), the NEW statement, or the DYNAMIC-NEW statement. When control returns from the context of a NEW statement or a DYNAMIC-NEW statement, the data element
    set to receive the object reference to the failed class instantiation receives the Unknown value (?).
•   When you invoke DELETE OBJECT from within a class constructor, the object is stored to the re-usable object
    cache. By the time the instantiation reaches a constructor, the object data stored in the cache is already in memory.
    Even though the current instantiation never completes, the AVM can use the object data to instantiate another instance
    of the class at a later time without problems.
•   If you need to terminate class instantiation within a constructor, Progress Software Corporation recommends that
    you use a RETURN ERROR or a THROW (as in the RETURN statement on page 889 or UNDO statement on page
    1019, respectively). This has the same effect as using the DELETE OBJECT THIS-OBJECT statement and also
    raises ERROR on the statement that attempts to instantiate the class. This allows your application to handle the
    uninstantiated class condition using ABL error handling options, such as the CATCH statement on page 113 or the
    NO-ERROR option on many statements.
•   For more information on working with socket and server socket objects, see OpenEdge Programming Interfaces.
•   For more information on working with class instances, see Develop Object-oriented ABL Applications.
•   Automatic garbage collection works for .NET objects, or for ABL objects that derive from .NET objects, similar to
    how it works for pure ABL class instances. However, .NET objects and the .NET components of an ABL-derived
    .NET object are also managed separately by .NET garbage collection. Thus, the release of memory held by a .NET
    object or an ABL-derived .NET object depends on both ABL and .NET garbage collection.
•   For a .NET form object (applicable to Windows only), you can typically invoke its Close( ) method or the
    System.Windows.Forms.Application:Exit( ) method (for non-modal forms) to both close the form
    and delete the associated object, making it available for .NET garbage collection. One instance where a form is not
    deleted using the Close( ) method is when a non-modal form is an invisible child form of a multiple-document
    interface (MDI). In this case, you must also invoke the DELETE OBJECT statement on the associated object
    reference, or otherwise remove all references to the form, to make the form available for .NET garbage collection.
  •   In a .NET event handler for the FormClosing event (applicable to Windows only), if you do delete object references,
      do not delete the object reference to the form (sender) that published the FormClosing event. Otherwise, this
      causes the FormClosing event to be published a second time for the same form. If you need to delete the sender
      of an event associated with the closing of a .NET form, execute the DELETE OBJECT statement on the sender in
      an event handler for the FormClosed event of the form. However, note that with garbage collection, you typically
      do not need to delete any object references in a .NET event handler.
  •   In ABL, the .NET Dispose( ) method is also available for freeing resources held by a .NET object. Its main
      purpose is to clean up unmanaged resources, such as file handles or socket connections. A well-behaved object cleans
      these up in its destructor, but calling Dispose( ) forces this cleanup in a more timely manner. It is good practice
      to call Dispose( ) on any object that implements the IDisposable interface.
      Note: .NET automatically calls Dispose( ) on a non-modal form when it is closed, unless the form is shown as
      a dialog box. .NET simply hides the dialog when it is closed. However, the AVM calls Dispose( ) by default
      for dialogs that inherit from Progress.Windows.Form. The AVM does not do this if the
      DisposeDialogOnClose property of the form is set to FALSE. This can be set on a particular instance or
      globally using the No Dialog Dispose (-nodialogdispose) startup parameter. One use case for not calling
      Dispose( ) is if you want to re-use the form at a later time.



DESTRUCTOR statement
   Defines a destructor for a class. A destructor is a special type of method that the AVM invokes when an instance of the
   class is deleted, either manually using the DELETE OBJECT statement on page 433 or automatically through garbage
   collection.
   Note: This statement is applicable only when used in a class definition (.cls) file.

   Syntax

     DESTRUCTOR [ PUBLIC ]class-name ( ) :

     destructor-body


   [ PUBLIC ]
                Specifies the access mode for the destructor. For destructors, this is always PUBLIC by default.
                As a PUBLIC resource, a destructor can be accessed indirectly by the defining class, any of its inheriting
                classes, and any class or procedure that instantiates the class object (that is, through an object reference),
                either by deleting the object instance using the DELETE OBJECT statement or as a result of garbage
                collection.
   class-name
                The name of the class this method destroys. This name must match the class name portion of the type
                name for the class (that is, the name of the class definition file excluding the .cls extension and any
                package path information).
   destructor-body
              The body of the destructor definition. Define the destructor body using the following syntax:

                         .
                         .
                         .
                    method-logic                    .
                         .
                         .
                         .
                  END [ DESTRUCTOR ].


                method-logic
                The logic of the destructor, which can contain any ABL statements currently allowed within a
                PROCEDURE block including class-related statements, but excluding the RETURN ERROR statement.
                This method typically contains logic to release system resources used by the class instance, for example,
                by executing the DELETE OBJECT statement on page 433 for handle-based objects created by the
                class or by invoking the Dispose( ) method on .NET objects created by the class. However, note
                that if the ABL class inherits from a .NET class, you cannot reliably access members of the .NET
                super class from your class destructor, because .NET might already have garbage collected it.
END [ DESTRUCTOR ]
                Specifies the end of the destructor body definition. You must end the destructor body definition with
                the END statement.


   Example
   The following example shows the definition of a destructor:

       DESTRUCTOR PUBLIC CustObj( ):

         EMPTY TEMP-TABLE ttCust.

       END DESTRUCTOR.



   Notes
   •   You can terminate a DESTRUCTOR statement with either a period (.) or a colon (:), but typically use a colon (:).
   •   A destructor has no parameters and no return value.
   •   You never explicitly invoke the destructor to delete a class instance. The method is implicitly invoked when the
       object is destroyed manually by the DELETE OBJECT statement or automatically as a result of garbage collection.
   •   The AVM also invokes the destructor of a given class if some constructor in the same class hierarchy raises ERROR
       during object instantiation and the constructor for the given class has already completed execution during this
       instantiation.
   •   If your application does not require it, you do not need to define a destructor for the class. ABL provides a default
       destructor for classes that do not define one.
   •   Errors raised in a destructor are not subject to the rules implied by the BLOCK-LEVEL ON ERROR UNDO, THROW
       or ROUTINE-LEVEL ON ERROR UNDO, THROW directives.



DYNAMIC-CAST function
   Returns a new object reference to the same class instance as an existing object reference, but with a different data type.
   This different data type is cast from the object type of the original object reference according to another object type
   specified by a run-time expression. The object types must be related, where one is a class type and the other is subclass
   of that class type or where one is an interface type and the other is a class that implements the interface of that type.
   When you cast an object reference, ABL treats it as if it referenced an instance of the object type to which it is cast. The
   underlying class hierarchy of the object instance does not change.

   Syntax

       DYNAMIC-CAST( object-reference , expression ).


   object-reference
               An object reference defined with the object type to be cast.
   expression
                A character expression that evaluates to the fully qualified type name for the ABL or .NET class or
                interface type to which the object reference is cast. This object type must be a class type in a class
                hierarchy that includes or implements the object-reference data type or it must be an interface type
                that the object-reference data type implements. Specify an object type name using the syntax described
                in the Type-name syntax on page 1011 reference entry. Any present USING statement has no effect. If
                no package is specified, the class or interface name must represent the complete type name.

   Notes
   •   You typically cast an object reference down a class hierarchy—that is, from a super class to a derived class within
       a class hierarchy, or from an interface to a class that implements that interface. However, you do not always need
       to explicitly cast an object reference. Because a derived class contains all the super classes in its inherited class
       hierarchy, ABL implicitly casts any object reference up within its class hierarchy, and because a class that implements
       an interface implements all of the methods specified for the interface, ABL implicitly casts any object reference
       from an implementing class to any interface that the class implements.
   •   At run time, ABL verifies that the object type specified by expression is within the class hierarchy of the specified
       object reference. Therefore, if you access a class member on the cast object reference that exists for the cast data
       type, but the referenced object does not actually define the accessed class member, the AVM raises a run-time
       ERROR.
   •   A .NET generic type can be part of a cast. For example, you can cast from a System.Object to a
       "System.Collections.Generic.List<SHORT>", because all .NET classes, including generic classes,
       derive from the .NET root class. However, note that you cannot cast from a
       "System.Collections.Generic.List<System.Object>" to a
       "System.Collections.Generic.List<System.Windows.Forms.Button>". You cannot assign a
       "List<Button>" reference to an object reference defined as a "List<Object>", because, even though the
       type parameters are compatible, the two objects as a whole are not equivalent and have no inheritance relationship.
       Therefore, a cast between these two objects cannot work either. For more information on .NET generic types, see
       the Data types on page 258 reference entry.
   •   You can also use the CAST function on page 111 to perform all casting operations at compile time. The primary
       reason for using the DYNAMIC-CAST function is to cast object references based on run-time conditions that
       determine the object type to use for the cast. Such conditions are common in applications that conform to the OpenEdge
       Reference Architecture (OERA). 

   •   You can use the DYNAMIC-CAST function to cast a parameter in a parameter list for a method using the following
       syntax, where expression evaluates to a subclass of the object-reference type:

         method-name( INPUT DYNAMIC-CAST( object-reference, expression ), ... ).


   •   You can use the DYNAMIC-CAST function to cast a temp-table field, which is defined as a
       Progress.Lang.Object, to use as an object of another class type. For example:

         DEFINE VARIABLE RCustObj AS CLASS acme.myObjs.CustObj.

         DEFINE TEMP-TABLE mytt NO-UNDO
           FIELD CustObj AS Progress.Lang.Object.

         RCustObj = DYNAMIC-CAST(mytt.CustObj, "acme.myObjs.CustObj").


       You can now use the object reference in RCustObj to invoke methods in the acme.myObjs.CustObj class.
   •   You cannot use the DYNAMIC-CAST function to cast an object reference to a subclass and invoke a method defined
       in that subclass using the following syntax:

         DYNAMIC-CAST( object-reference, object-type-name ):method-name(
         parameters ).


       Similarly, you cannot use this syntax to invoke a method on a class that implements the referenced interface from
       which you cast the specified class.


   


DYNAMIC-ENUM function
   Returns an instance of the enumeration type for the specified enumeration member.
                                                                                                         
   Syntax

     [ return-value = ] DYNAMIC-ENUM( enum-type-name, enum-member )


   return-value
              Specifies a data element that is assigned the returned value. The AVM checks that the enum instance
              returned can be assigned to the target, and the AVM raises an error if the data types aren't compatible.
   enum-type-name
             Specifies the name of an ABL or .NET enumeration type that defines the member. This is a
             CHARACTER expression that the AVM evaluates to the type name of an enumeration type at runtime.
   enum-member
           Specifies an enum member in one of two ways:
               •   A CHARACTER expression that evaluates to the member name at runtime. For flag enums, this
                   can be a comma-delimited list of member names for two or more members defined by the enum
                   type.
               •   An INTEGER or INT64 expression that evaluates to the underlying numeric value of the member
                   at runtime. For flag enums, this numeric value can represent two or more members defined by the
                   enum type.
               Note: The function generates a runtime error if any specified character or numeric value does not
               correspond to a defined member.

   Example
   In the following code fragment, Direction is an enum with a member defined for each of the four cardinal direction, and cNeededDirection
   is a string that evaluates to the name of one of the members defined by Direction. The code then uses DYAMIC-ENUM
   to set myDirection as an object reference to an instance of the member specified by cNeededDirection:

     DEFINE INPUT PARAMETER cNeededDirection AS CHARACTER.
     DEFINE VARIABLE myDirection AS Direction.

     myDirection = DYNAMIC-ENUM("Direction", cNeededDirection).



  



DYNAMIC-INVOKE function
   Invokes a class-based method whose name is specified by a run-time expression, but whose parameters are defined at
   compile time.

   Syntax

     [ return-value = ] DYNAMIC-INVOKE( {class-type-name | object-reference}
       , method-name [ , parameter [ , parameter ] ... ] )


   return-value
              An optional data element that is assigned the return value from the invoked, non-void method. The
              AVM checks return-value at run time for data type compatibility with what is actually returned by
              the method. ABL raises a run-time error if you invoke a void method where a return value is expected.
   class-type-name
               The name of an ABL or .NET class type that defines the specified method as a static member. If the
               method is static, this parameter is a CHARACTER expression that the AVM evaluates to the type
               name of the class at run time. This expression must specify a class type name, except that you must always specify the complete type
               name; any present USING statement has no effect.You cannot use class-type-name to call an instance
               method.
   object-reference
               Specifies a reference to an ABL or .NET class instance that defines the specified method as an instance
               member. You cannot use object-reference to call a static method. 
   method-name
            A CHARACTER expression that evaluates to the method name. The AVM evaluates method-name
            at run time.
   [ , parameter [ , parameter ]... ]
               Specifies zero or more parameters passed to the method. You must provide the parameters identified
               by the specified method, matched with respect to number, data type, and mode. To invoke a method
               that is overloaded in the class, you must specify sufficient information for each parameter in order to
               disambiguate methods that have similar parameter lists. Otherwise, the AVM raises an error identifying
               the ambiguity.
               If the parameter mode (INPUT, OUTPUT, INPUT-OUTPUT) is not specified, the mode defaults to
               INPUT. This differs from normal invocation of a method, where the parameter mode defaults to the
               method parameter. In this case, the compiler does not know the method at compile time, and therefore
               must use INPUT for the default, instead of inferring it from the called method. We recommended that
               you always supply the parameter mode.
               

   Example
   MyObject is a class that has one method called MultiplyTheValue. This method is invoked in the code that
   follows.

   MyObject.cls

       CLASS MyObject:
         METHOD PUBLIC DECIMAL MultiplyTheValue(dValue AS DECIMAL):
            RETURN dValue * 2.
         END.
       END.


   In this example, the MultiplyTheValue method in the class instance referenced by rObj expects a DECIMAL
   value.

       VAR DECIMAL retValue.
       VAR MyObject rObj = NEW MyObject().

       retValue = DYNAMIC-INVOKE(rObj, "MultiplyTheValue", 12.3).
       MESSAGE retValue VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.


   Notes
   •   The Invoke() method of the Progress.Lang.Class class provides similar functionality to the
       DYNAMIC-INVOKE function. The difference is that DYNAMIC-INVOKE has a fixed, compile-time parameter list
       and, therefore, does not require the creation of a ParameterList object at run time.
   •   DYNAMIC-INVOKE must be executed as a stand-alone statement (without assigning it to a return-value) if the
       method it invokes is VOID.

   

DYNAMIC-NEW statement
   Creates an instance of a class (object) whose class type is specified by a run-time expression, and assigns its object
   reference to an appropriately defined ABL data element. Once assigned, you can use the object reference to access this
   class instance and its PUBLIC data members, properties, and methods. For more information on object references, see
   the reference entry for a Class-based object reference on page 127.

   Syntax

       object-reference = DYNAMIC-NEW expression
         ( [ parameter [ , parameter ]... ] ) [ NO-ERROR ]


   object-reference
               The name of an ABL data element to which you want to assign the object reference of a new instance
               of the class specified by expression. This data element must be defined as a compatible class or interface
               type, and can be one of the following:
               •   A temp-table field defined as a Progress.Lang.Object class type using the DEFINE TEMP-TABLE
                   statement.
             •   A variable scoped to the current procedure, user-defined function, or method of a class, or an
                 accessible class-based variable data member, each defined as a class or interface type using the
                 VAR statement or DEFINE VARIABLE statement.
             •   A parameter defined as a class or interface type for the current procedure, user-defined function,
                 or method of a class using an appropriate DEFINE PARAMETER statement  or
                 Parameter definition syntax.
             •   An accessible and writable class-based property defined as a class or interface type using the
                 DEFINE PROPERTY statement.
             To be compatible, the data type of object-reference must be:
             •   The same class as the class specified by expression
             •   A super class of the class specified by expression
             •   An interface that is implemented by the class specified by expression
expression
             A character expression that evaluates to a fully qualified class type name for the ABL or .NET class
             you want to instantiate. This expression must specify a class type name as described in the Type-name
             syntax on page 1011 reference entry, except that you must always specify the complete type name; any
             present USING statement has no effect. If no package (or namespace for a .NET class) is specified,
             the class name must represent the complete type name.
             This expression cannot evaluate to:
             •   An ABL built-in class type name, such as Progress.Lang.Object
             •   The type name of an interface or abstract class
( [ parameter [ , parameter ]... ] )
             Specifies zero or more parameters passed to a PUBLIC instance constructor that is defined for the
             class. You must provide the parameters identified by the specified constructor, matched with respect
             to number, data type, and mode.
             
NO-ERROR
       The NO-ERROR option is used to prevent the statement from raising ERROR and displaying
       error messages.
             For the DYNAMIC-NEW statement with NO-ERROR, if ERROR is raised, then the object-reference
             remains unchanged.

Example
The following contrived (non-compiling) procedure fragment shows the instantiation of a new class type specified with
a variable:

  /* Can be set to a subclass type name */
  DEFINE INPUT PARAMETER myBusObjParm AS CHARACTER NO-UNDO.

  /* Procedure only knows about the base class */
  DEFINE VARIABLE myBusObj AS CLASS acme.myObjs.BusObj NO-UNDO.

  myBusObj = DYNAMIC-NEW myBusObjParm ( ). /* Create the passed subclass */
   myBusObj:getData( ).                    /* Invoke base class method
                                               polymorphically on subclass */
                                                                                                        

In this case, the procedure assumes that it is operating on a class, acme.myObjs.BusObj, that is the base class for
several subclasses, each of which implements the same set of operations for its own purposes, such as the getData( )
method shown. When the procedure is called, its INPUT parameter is passed a character string that evaluates to a subclass
type name, such as "acme.myObjs.CustObj", which it then uses to instantiate a class of that type using the
DYNAMIC-NEW statement. Thus, the same procedure can be called to instantiate and operate on different subclasses of
the same base class, as determined by run-time conditions.

Notes
•   Unlike NEW, you cannot use DYNAMIC-NEW as a function in an expression. You can use it only as a statement.
•   After the assignment, object-reference contains a copy of the object reference value returned by DYNAMIC-NEW,
    which points to the same object instance, not a copy of the object created by DYNAMIC-NEW.
•   Although you can assign an object reference to a temp-table field defined as a Progress.Lang.Object class type, you
    cannot assign an object reference to a field in a database table. For more information, see Develop Object-oriented
    ABL Applications.
•   The ABL Virtual Machine (AVM) automatically deletes (garbage collects) any class instance that you create with
    this statement some time after no reference to that object exists in the ABL session. However, you can force any
    class instance to be deleted immediately by using the DELETE OBJECT statement. For more information on garbage
    collection for class instances, see the DELETE OBJECT statement on page 433 reference entry.
•   If expression specifies a .NET object, note that in ABL you cannot instantiate the following .NET classes:
    •   Any .NET class that is defined in the default namespace, that is, where the class name is the complete object type
        name
    •   System.Threading.Thread or any class derived from it
    •   System.Delegate or any delegate type derived from it
•   If expression specifies a GUI or non-GUI .NET object type, you can instantiate it within a non-GUI ABL session
    on Windows, including a:
    •   Character mode (CHUI) client
    •   Batch-mode client
    •   Progress Application Server (PAS) for OpenEdge instance
    However, you cannot block for any .NET object events or visualize any GUI objects in a non-GUI ABL session.
•   This statement can raise errors during the execution of constructors for the class being instantiated, or for any class
    in its inherited class hierarchy. For example:
    •   A constructor in the class hierarchy executes the RETURN statement on page 889 with the ERROR option or the
        UNDO statement on page 1019 with the THROW or RETURN ERROR options.
    •   The class definition file for the class, a super class, or an interface could not be found.
    •   The run-time parameters of the constructor for the class, or a constructor for a class in the inherited class hierarchy,
        are not compatible.
    When the AVM encounters one of these errors, and the constructor cannot create the class instance or its inherited
    class hierarchy, the AVM automatically invokes the destructor for any class that has already been constructed while
    building the class hierarchy for the object.
    For more information on errors raised by instantiating classes, see Develop Object-oriented ABL Applications.
•   The New( ) method of the Progress.Lang.Class class provides similar functionality to the DYNAMIC-NEW
    function. The advantage to the latter is that it has a fixed, compile-time parameter list and does not require the creation
    of a Progress.Lang.ParameterList object at run time.
  •   The DYNAMIC-NEW statement gives a compiler error if a property is specified at the end of the statement. To correct
       this, add parentheses to disambiguate the statement, or assign a value to a scalar variable in a separate statement and
       use that variable in the DYNAMIC-NEW statement. For example:

         //Does not compile...
         cSomeClass = DYNAMIC-NEW THIS-OBJECT:testProperty().

         // Workaround 1 - Add parentheses to disambiguate the statement
         cSomeClass = DYNAMIC-NEW (THIS-OBJECT:testProperty)().

         // Workaround 2 - Assign a variable and use in DYNAMIC-NEW
         chVarName = THIS-OBJECT:testProperty.
         cSomeClass = DYNAMIC-NEW chVarName().



   



DYNAMIC-PROPERTY function
   Returns the value of a class property. The function allows you to refer to a class property by providing a character
   expression for the property name, along with an object reference, THIS-OBJECT system reference, or the name of a
   class. The compiler supports both ABL user-defined types and .NET types for the object reference or class name.
   At run time, the AVM:
   •   Determines the actual type of the object reference, if present
   •   Resolves the property name expression
   •   Validates the property data type against the type of the target and performs the assignment
   Note: The DYNAMIC-PROPERTY function also works with .NET indexed properties. Normally, ABL allows you to
   refer to a .NET indexed property without using the property name, but for dynamic access you must use the property
   name, typically Item indexed property.
                                                                                                          
   Syntax

       [ return-value = ] DYNAMIC-PROPERTY(
           { object-reference | class-type-name } , property-name [ , index ] )


   return-value
               Specifies a data element that is assigned the value returned when you execute the property's GET
               accessor. The AVM does the required conversions automatically as if there were a CAST or an ABL
               conversion function such as STRING or INTEGER present.
   object-reference
               Specifies a reference to an ABL or .NET class instance that exposes the specified property as an
               instance member. The compiler allows object-reference to be declared as any object type. At run time,
               the object type must resolve to the type that exposes the property.
   class-type-name
               Specifies the name of an ABL or .NET class type that defines the specified property as a static member.
               This is a CHARACTER expression that the AVM evaluates to the type name of a class at run time. It
               must only be the name of a class: interfaces are not valid.
   property-name
              Specifies a CHARACTER expression that evaluates to the property name at run time.
               Note: The function generates a run-time error if the property-name does not name a property exposed
               by the object-reference or a static property exposed by class-type-name. A run-time error also gets
               generated when the required property accessor is not accessible or does not exist. For example, an
               error is generated when there is an attempt to get the value of a protected property outside the class
               hierarchy where it is defined, or there is an attempt by the AVM to set a property that has no SET
               accessor.
   index
               Specifies an integer expression for the index of the specified element. Use index to set or retrieve an
               individual array element. You can also operate on an entire array by removing the index the same way
               as you work with non-dynamic property access.

  

DYNAMIC-PROPERTY statement
   Sets the value of a class property. The statement allows you to refer to a class property by providing a character expression
   for the property name, along with an object reference, THIS-OBJECT system reference, or the name of a class. The
   compiler supports both ABL user-defined types and .NET types for the object reference or class name.
   At run time, the AVM:
   •   Determines the actual type of the object reference, if present
   •   Resolves the property name expression
   •   Validates the property data type against the type of the target and performs the assignment
   Note: The DYNAMIC-PROPERTY statement also works with .NET indexed properties. Normally, ABL allows you to
   refer to a .NET indexed property without using the property name, but for dynamic access you must use the property
   name, typically Item indexed property.
   Note: Compound assignment operators (+=, -=, *=, /=) can be used with the DYNAMIC-PROPERTY statement.

Syntax

  DYNAMIC-PROPERTY( { object-reference | class-type-name }
    , property-name [ , index ] ) = new-value


object-reference
            Specifies a reference to an ABL or .NET class instance that exposes the specified property as an
            instance member. The compiler allows object-reference to be declared as any object type. At run time,
            the object type must resolve to the type that exposes the property.
class-type-name
            Specifies the name of an ABL or .NET class type that defines the specified property as a static member.
            This is a CHARACTER expression that the AVM evaluates to the type name of a class at run time. It
            must only be the name of a class: interfaces are not valid.
property-name
           Specifies a CHARACTER expression that evaluates to the property name at run time.
index
            Specifies an integer expression for the index of the specified element. Use index to set or retrieve an
            individual array element. You can also operate on an entire array by removing the index the same way
            as you work with non-dynamic property access.
new-value
            The value of any data type that can be assigned to the property.
            Note: The value of new-value cannot be converted to the property's type.

Examples
The following example code uses the DYNAMIC-PROPERTY statement to set the Amount property of the invoice
object:

  VAR InvoiceClass invoice.

  invoice = NEW InvoiceClass().

  /* Set the Amount property */
  DYNAMIC-PROPERTY(invoice, "Amount") = 654.32.


The following example code uses the += assignment operator, with the DYNAMIC-PROPERTY statement, to add to the
Amount property:

  VAR InvoiceClass invoice.
  VAR DECIMAL latefee = 30.

  invoice = NEW InvoiceClass().

  /* Add to the Amount property */
  DYNAMIC-PROPERTY(invoice, "Amount") += latefee.


ENUM statement

Defines a user-defined enumeration (also known as an enumerated type or enum). An enum is made up of a list of
   strongly typed, named constants called members. The value of a variable defined as an enum is restricted to the list of
   members defined for that enum. Some of the advantages of enums are that they are self-documenting, strongly typed,
   and validated at compile time (i.e., the compiler verifies that a variable defined as an enum can only contain values
   defined by that enum).
   In addition to being named, each member also has an underlying numeric value associated with it. By default, the
   compiler sets those associated values automatically. Generally, you do not need to worry about the numerical values,
   but you can specify one or more of the values explicitly if desired.
   You can define two types of enum. In the standard version, a variable defined as an enum can only be assigned one
   value at a time. You can also define a flag enum. Any variable defined as a flag enum can be assigned any combination
   of the members (also referred to as "flags" for flag enums) at one time. You can perform operations on flag enum
   variables to set and unset one or more of the flags.
   All enums implicitly inherit from one of two classes. The single-value enums inherit from Progress.Lang.Enum,
   and flag enums inherit from Progress.Lang.FlagsEnum, which is a subclass of Progress.Lang.Enum. See
   the Progress.Lang.Enum class and Progress.Lang.FlagsEnum class entries for more information.

   Syntax

     ENUM enum-type-name [FLAGS]:
         DEFINE ENUM enum-member-definition
                   [enum-member-definition] ...
     END [ENUM].


   enum-type-name
             Defines the type name for a user-defined enum. You can specify an ABL enum name in a way similar
             to how you specify an ABL class type. All the requirements and restrictions on how to specify an ABL
             class type apply to an enum. 
   FLAGS
              Defines the enum as a flag enum, with the defined members acting as flags. This allows you to set one
              or more flags into the same variable. You can define up to 64 distinct members to be used as flags.
              You can also define a flag as a combination of other flags, and a flag defined this way does not count
              as a distinct flag.
   enum-member-definition
           Defines a member using the following syntax:

                 member-name [ = {member-name [, member-name]... }
                     | constant ]


              member-name
              Specifies the name of the member. Each member name must be unique among the names of all members
              defined in the enum as well as all properties, events, and variable data members that are defined in
              the class hierarchy and accessible to the defining class. The rules for member names follow the same
              rules that are in place for variable and property names. Member names are case insensitive and can
              be reserved keywords.
              member-name [, member-name]
              Assigns the same numeric value as a previously defined member. In this way, you can define multiple
              members as equivalent with the same underlying value. For flag enums, you can also equate an member        
           with multiple, previously defined members, entered as a comma-delimited list. 
constant
           Defines the numeric value associated with the member. The value must be a constant of type INT64.
           The value can be represented in hexadecimal notation (for easier readability with flag enums, for
           example).
           If the first member is not explicitly assigned a value, the compiler starts with a value of 1. For each
           subsequent member not assigned a value, the compiler assigns a value 1 larger than the previous
           member for a single-value enum, or the next power of 2 for a flag enum.
           Note: Flag enums are the primary use case for explicitly setting the underlying values of members.
           Progress recommends that, when defining a flag enum, you always explicitly define a member with
           a value of 0.
END [ENUM]
        Specifies the end of the enum definition. You must end the enum definition with the END statement.

Examples
The following example shows how to define an enum with the four cardinal directions as its named values:

  ENUM Direction:
      DEFINE ENUM North
                  South
                  East
                  West.
  END ENUM.


The next example shows how to define an member as equivalent to another:

  ENUM Direction:
      DEFINE ENUM North
                  Default = North
                  South
                  East
                  West.
  END ENUM.


In this case, both North and Default have an underlying value of 1.
The following is an example of a flag enum, including the member ReadWrite being defined as a combination of
previously defined members:

  ENUM Permission FLAGS:
      DEFINE ENUM None = 0
                  Read
                  Write
                  Update = Write
                  ReadWrite = Read,Write
                  Create
                  Delete
                  Execute.
  END ENUM.

For flag enums, it is recommended that you include an member with an underlying value of 0, representing no flags set.
Because the compiler automatically starts with a value of 1 for both single-value and flag enums, you must define an
member with a value of 0 explicitly.
The syntax for assigning a value to a variable defined as an enum is similar to the syntax used to assign values to static
data members of a class:

    enum-type-name:member-name


Using the Direction enum from the first example, this code fragment defines myDirection as a variable of type
Direction and assigns myDirection the member South:

    DEFINE VARIABLE myDirection AS Direction.

    myDirection = Direction:South.


This syntax cannot be used to set multiple flags for a variable defined as a flag enum. To set multiple flags, you need
to use bitwise operators or the SetFlag( ), ToggleFlag( ), and UnsetFlag( ) methods, as described in the
Notes section of this entry.
Members are read-only, so the following code will not compile:

    Direction:South = myDirection.


Like other uninitialized class references, variables defined as enums have an initial value of the unknown (?) value.

Notes
•   Each member represents an instance of an object of the type of enum that defines them. When you reference a
    member, you get an instance that is maintained by the AVM.
•   Because enums are implicitly class based, you can use them in many of the same ways you can use a class type or
    instance. You can define variables, parameters, return types, and class-based properties as an enum. These data
    elements can then hold a reference to an enum instance. For example, using the Permission enum defined in the
    Examples, the following code fragments are all valid:

      METHOD PUBLIC Permission SomeOperation (INPUT perm AS Permission):
      END.

      PROCEDURE proc:
       DEFINE INPUT-OUTPUT PARAMETER perm AS Permission.
      END.

      FUNCTION func1 RETURNS Permission (OUTPUT perm AS Permission):
      END.


    You can explicitly pass members as INPUT parameters using the enum-type-name:member-name syntax, but
    because the member itself cannot be modified, it cannot be passed as an OUTPUT or INPUT-OUTPUT parameter.
    For example, the following is not allowed:

      RUN proc1 (INPUT-OUTPUT Permission:Read).

    You can also assign an enum object reference to a temp-table field defined as the Progress.Lang.Object class type,
    but you cannot assign an enum object reference to a database table field. For more information on object references
    in general, see the reference entry for a Class-based object reference on page 127.
•   Enums must be defined in a .cls file by themselves, not with other class or interface definitions.
•   Although enums are implicitly class based, you can not instantiate an enum using NEW. You must use the type-name
    syntax shown in the Examples section to access the members defined in an enum, or use the GetEnum( ) method
    to get an enum instance. The method takes an enum member name as a CHARACTER or the underlying numeric
    value of a member as an INT64 and returns an enum instance. For example, both of the following lines of code create
    an enum instance using the Direction enum type, and in both cases, myDirection is assigned the member
    South:

      DEFINE VARIABLE myDirection AS Direction.

      myDirection = Direction:GetEnum("South").
      myDirection = Direction:GetEnum(2).


    This method is not part of the implementation of Progress.Lang.Enum, but it is automatically available for all
    built-in and user-defined enum types. For full details, see the GetEnum( ) method entry.
•   All enums are final. They also cannot explicitly inherit from another class or implement interfaces.
•   Enums are serializable. You can pass parameters defined as enums between an ABL client and an application server.
•   Much of the functionality for classes is also supported for enums, including package names, the USING statement,
    reflection, and assignment and casting rules. Unlike classes, however, enums cannot have data members, properties,
    events, or user-defined methods.
•   You can define variables, properties, and parameters using the AS CLASS phrase. For example:

      DEFINE VARIABLE myDirection AS CLASS Direction.


•   In the original Direction enum example, the underlying values for the members are automatically set by the
    compiler as 1 for North, 2 for South, and so on. However, you can change this pattern by explicitly setting one
    or more of the numerical values. For example:

      ENUM Direction:
          DEFINE ENUM North
                      South
                      East = 4
                      West.
      END ENUM.


    In this case, the underlying values for the members are still automatically set by the compiler as 1 for North, 2 for
    South. East is explicitly set as 4, so the compiler sets the value of West as one larger than the previous member,
    which in this case will be 5. The same rules hold true for flag enums, except that the compiler assigns the next power
    of 2 to each member that does not have its underlying value explicitly set.
                                                                                                     
•   When you have to explicitly set the underlying value of an member, you can use hexadecimal notation, particularly
    for ease of readability with flag enums. Following is the Permission enum with the underlying values explicitly
    set:

        ENUM Permission FLAGS:
            DEFINE ENUM None = 0
                        Read = 0x01
                        Write = 0x02
                        Update = 0x02
                        ReadWrite = 0x03
                        Create = 0x04
                        Delete = 0x08
                        Execute = 0x10.
        END ENUM.


•   If desired, you can split the defined list of members in an ENUM statement into two or more DEFINE ENUM
    statements for readability. For example:

        ENUM Direction:
            DEFINE ENUM North
                        South.
            DEFINE ENUM East
                        West.
        END ENUM.


    The same rules for how the compiler assigns the underlying numerical values still apply, i.e., in the example above,
    South has an underlying value of 2, and East has an underlying value of 3. In other words, the underlying numerical
    values will be assigned according to the order of the members, regardless of whether or not the member list is split
    into multiple DEFINE ENUM statements.
    Note: Although you can split the list of members into separate DEFINE ENUM statements, the list of members for
    a given enum must be completely defined in a single ENUM statement. Additional members cannot be added to a
    defined enum in a separate ENUM statement.
•   The following comparison operators can be used with enums, as long as the two expressions being compared are
    both defined as the same enum type:
    •   EQ (=)
    •   NE (<>)
    •   GT (>)
    •   LT (<)
    •   GE (>=)
    •   LE (<=)
    When used with expressions that are enum types, the operators compare the underlying numerical values of the
    members. Comparisons can be made using either single-value enums or flag enums. Using the previously defined
    Direction enum, this code fragment shows a comparison and results in the message being displayed:

        DEFINE VARIABLE myDirection AS Direction.

        myDirection = Direction:South.

        IF myDirection NE Direction:North THEN
           MESSAGE "The current heading is not north."
              VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.

    You can only use the comparison operators for two expressions defined as the same enum type.
    The CompareTo( ) method of Progress.Lang.Enum also allows you to compare enum instances based on the
    members' numeric values. See the CompareTo( ) method entry for details.
•   The CASE statement also supports the use of enums. For example, using the Direction enum defined in the
    Examples section:

        DEFINE VARIABLE myDirection AS Direction.

        myDirection = Direction:South.

        CASE myDirection:
           WHEN Direction:North THEN
              MESSAGE "Your current direction is north.".
           WHEN Direction:South THEN
              MESSAGE "Your current direction is south.".
           OTHERWISE
              MESSAGE "Your current direction is east, west, or unknown.".
        END CASE.



    The expressions in the WHEN phrases must be members from the enum type in the CASE statement.
    Note: You can use flag enums with the CASE statement, but be aware that the WHEN phrases check for equality
    of the members strictly based on numeric values, not as combinations of multiple flags. For example, in the following
    code, the two WHEN statements for Permission:Read and Permission:Write will not fire for the given
    value of myPermission; the OTHERWISE statement will.

        DEFINE VARIABLE myPermission AS Permission.

        myPermission = Permission:ReadWrite.

        CASE myPermission:
           WHEN Permission:Read THEN
              MESSAGE "You can read data.".
           WHEN Permission:Write THEN
              MESSAGE "You can write data.".
           OTHERWISE
              ...
        END CASE.




•   The following bitwise operators can be used with flag enums. Each operator does a bitwise comparison of two enum
    expressions and returns a new enum instance as a result:
    •   Bitwise AND: Check the state of a particular flag.
    •   Bitwise OR: Set a flag.
    •   Bitwise XOR (exclusive OR): Toggle a flag.
    •   Bitwise NOT (complement): Turn off a flag.
                CAUTION: Because bitwise NOT turns off flags, it is possible to end up with an enum instance with
                no flags set, i.e., a value of 0. Always defining an member with value 0 is recommended to avoid an
                enum expression that doesn't correspond to any defined members.


    As with the logical comparison operators, both expressions must be the same enum type. If they are not, the code
    will not compile.


    Using the Permission enum from the Examples section, the following examples show use cases of the bitwise
    operators:

        DEFINE VARIABLE myPermissions AS Permission.

        /* myPermissions is set with a Permission instance with the Read and
           Write flags set. */
        myPermissions = Permission:Read OR Permission:Write.

        /* All flags are set with the possible exception of Create, which is
           toggled. */
        myPermissions = myPermissions XOR Permission:Create.

        /* Ensures that the Create flag is not set. */
        myPermissions = myPermissions AND NOT Permission:Create.

        /* All flags are set except Create. */
        myPermissions = NOT Permission:Create.

        /* Checks to see if Read is set. */
        IF (myPermissions AND Permission:Read) = Permission:Read THEN ...

        /* Three additional ways to check if Read is set. */
        IF (myPermissions AND Permission:Read):Equals(Permission:Read) THEN ...

        IF myPermissions:IsFlagSet(Permission:Read) THEN ...

        IF (myPermissions AND Permission:Read) NE Permission:None THEN ...


    The order of operator precedence for bitwise and logical operators is the following:
    •   bitwise NOT
    •   logical NOT
    •   bitwise AND
    •   bitwise XOR
    •   bitwise OR
    •   logical AND
    •   logical OR
    In practice, the order of precedence for bitwise and logical operators are independent because the bitwise operators
    return an enum instance and the logical operators return a logical. Code like the following will not compile because
    enum1 AND enum2 returns an enum instance, and a logical is required for the OR part of the statement:

        IF enum1 AND enum2 OR iCount <> 1...


   •   In addition to the bitwise operators, there are three methods that you can use to set and unset flags: the ToggleFlag(
    ) method, the SetFlag( ) method, and the UnsetFlag( ) method. These methods are not part of the implementation of
    Progress.Lang.FlagsEnum, but they are automatically available for all built-in and user-defined flag enums.
•   The MINIMUM and MAXIMUM functions do not support enums.
•   The STRING and QUOTER functions return a member name for enum-valued expressions. For flag enum-valued
    expressions with multiple flags set, STRING returns a comma-separated list of member names. Similarly, PUT will
    send the appropriate member name(s) to the output destination.

   •   The INTEGER, INT64, and DECIMAL functions return the underlying numeric value of an member for enum-valued
       expressions. Given that the numeric values of an member are of type INT64, it is possible the INTEGER function
       will raise an error with an member if the numeric value cannot be represented as an INTEGER.
   •   Calling DELETE OBJECT on an enum instance will be silently ignored because enum instances are maintained by
       the AVM. Enums also do not appear in the SESSION-FIRST-OBJECT/SESSION-LAST-OBJECT chain.


Enumeration member access
   References an ABL or .NET enumeration member in order to read its value.

   Syntax

       enum-type-name : enumeration-member


   enum-type-name
             The type name of an ABL or .NET enumeration type whose member you want to access. Specify an
             enumeration type name using the syntax. With an appropriate USING statement, you can specify an unqualified enumeration
             type name.
   enumeration-member
             Specifies a name that identifies a specific enumeration member defined in the ABL or .NET enumeration
             type.

   Example
   To set the background color of a button (button1) to the known system color, aqua, you might enter this ABL code
   to set the BackColor button property to the value of the appropriate System.Drawing.KnownColor member:

       button1:BackColor = System.Drawing.KnownColor:Aqua.


   Similarly, you can set a variable defined as a Progress.Reflect.Flags enumeration to the Public member for use with
   one of ABL's reflection methods:

       DEFINE myAccessLevel AS Progress.Reflect.Flags.

       myAccessLevel = Progress.Reflect.Flags:Public.



   Notes
   •   A .NET enumeration type can be an inner member of a class or its own type.


GET-CLASS function
   Returns the object reference for the Progress.Lang.Class instance associated with the specified class or interface type.

   Syntax

     GET-CLASS ( object-type-name )


   object-type-name
               Specifies the type name of an ABL or .NET class or interface type, using the syntax described in the
               Type-name syntax on page 1011 reference entry. With an appropriate USING statement on page 1035,
               you can also specify an unqualified class or interface name alone. If object-type-name is not the name
               of an existing ABL class that can be found on PROPATH or (for Windows) a .NET class that can be
               resolved based on the assemblies.xml file in use, a compiler error will result.

   Example
   Unlike the GetClass() method of Progress.Lang.Class, GET-CLASS takes a type name as its argument instead of a
   CHARACTER expression that holds a type name. As a result, USING statements can be applied to the argument, and
   the compiler checks the type name at compile time.
   The following code uses GET-CLASS to determine if acme.myObjs.CustObj is FINAL:

     USING Progress.Lang.*.
     USING acme.myObjs.*.

     DEFINE VARIABLE lFinal AS LOGICAL.

     lFinal = GET-CLASS(CustObj):IsFinal().
     MESSAGE "Is the class FINAL? " lFinal VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.


HASH-CODE function
   Returns a hash code, as an INTEGER value, for one or more arguments. The HASH-CODE function is intended to be
   used in objects that are part of a hash-based collection, that is, those that implement the Progress.Collections.IHashable
   interface or the Progress.Collections.IEqualityComparer<T> interface.

   Syntax

       HASH-CODE(arg [, arg]…)


   arg
                 An expression of any of the data types allowed when defining a variable.This includes scalar data
                 types, object-oriented ABL object types, and the Unknown value (?). BLOB/CLOB types are not
                 supported.
                 The function accepts up to 10 arguments. If you need more than 10 arguments, you can calculate the
                 hash code for the first 10, and then feed the result into another call to HASH-CODE.

   Example
   The following code example uses the HASH-CODE function to generate a hash code based on a first and last name.

       VAR CHAR FirstName.
       VAR CHAR LastName.
       VAR INT hashval.
       ...
       hashval = HASH-CODE(FirstName, LastName).



   Notes
   •     This function is intended for use with hash-based collections only.
   •     The hash code returned by the HASH-CODE function is consistent within a given ABL session. Once the ABL session
         is restarted, there is no guarantee that the hash code will be the same. Therefore, it is strongly recommended that
         you do not store or pass the hash code between sessions, as the value may not be the same while executing in different
         sessions.
   •     The HASH-CODE function is provided specifically to support hash-based collection within a given session and is
         not a replacement for the ENCODE function, nor is it suitable for any cryptography tasks. Its sole purpose is to provide
         a hash code that can be used with hash-based collections.
   •     The order of the arguments can change the resulting hash code value. Therefore, if comparing the value returned by
         the function, be consistent with the order of the parameters.
   •     Any two values that return TRUE when compared with the EQ operator in ABL return the same hash code. Simply
         put, given two values, val1 and val2, if the expression val1 EQ val2 returns TRUE, then HASH-CODE(val1)
         EQ HASH-CODE(val2) is also true.
   •     The format of a given field or variable does not impact the calculation of the hash code, only the actual data does.
   •     A given integer value returns the same hash code whether it is represented using either the INTEGER or INT64 data
         type (assuming the value does not overflow the INTEGER data type).
   •     A given decimal value with no significant decimal places (that is 5 EQ 5.00 returns TRUE) returns the same hash
         code regardless of the number of decimal places specified.

   •   Values of type CHARACTER and LONGCHAR generate the hash code respecting the case-insensitiveness of the
       values. That is, a value of either one of those data types generate the same hash code if two case-insensitive strings
       are considered equal. If the value is case-sensitive, the hash code is not expected to be the same as another value that
       is case-insensitive, unless both strings match exactly.
   •   LONGCHAR strings of different code pages are always converted to the codepage specified by the -cpinternal
       startup parameter for comparison and return the same hash code if they are considered to be equal by the AVM.
   •   For MEMPTR values, HASH-CODE uses all the bytes stored in the memptr, as defined by its size (as returned by
       the GET-SIZE function) when generating the hash code. All other data types use the data as provided by the
       expression that generated them.
   •   When passing an object-oriented ABL object as an argument to the HASH-CODE function, the AVM checks if the
       object implements the Progress.Collection.IHashable interface, in which case it calls the HashCode()
       method to get the hash code for that object instance. If the object does not implement such interface, the AVM uses
       an internally generated value that is guaranteed not to change while the object is still in scope.


INTERFACE statement
   Defines a user-defined interface. An interface defined with this statement represents a user-defined data type that defines
   a set of method, property, and event prototypes for methods, properties, and events that can be implemented by one or
   more classes. Any class that implements the interface must support all the methods, properties, and events whose
   prototypes are defined in the interface or any interface from which this interface inherits member prototypes.
   You cannot instantiate an interface as an object. You can only use it to define the specified interface for a class (which
   you can instantiate) that implements the interface.
   Note: This statement is applicable only when used in a class definition (.cls) file. For more information, see the Notes
   section in this reference entry.

   Syntax

     INTERFACE interface-type-name
     [ INHERITS super-interface-name [ , super-interface-name ] ... ] :
     interface-body


   interface-type-name
               Type-name syntax. You can also specify an unqualified interface name
               (without a package), but only if the interface name represents the full type name for the interface (that
               is, the interface is not defined as part of a package).
               Note that you cannot specify "Progress" as the first component of the package name for any ABL
               user-defined interface. For example, "Progress.Inventory.IUpdateInv" is an invalid type
               name for a user-defined interface and results in a compiler error.The value of interface-type-name is
               restricted to alphanumeric characters plus the symbols #, $, %, and _.
   INHERITS super-interface-name [ , super-interface-name ]
           Optionally specifies the type name of one or more other interfaces (super interfaces) from which this
           interface inherits member prototypes as part of its definition. Each super-interface-name you
           specify can be an ABL or .NET interface type name as described in the Type-name syntax on page
           1011 reference entry. With an appropriate USING statement on page 1035, you can also specify an
           unqualified interface name (an interface name without the ABL package or .NET namespace that
           completes the interface type name).
               Also note that if more than one occurrence of a super interface type or member prototype appears in
               the interface inheritance hierarchy, it is treated as a single occurrence. However, interface-type-name
               (the current interface definition type name) can never appear as any super-interface-name, and can
               never be inherited by any interface specified by a super-interface-name. In other words, there can be
               no cycles (recursive inheritance) in an interface inheritance hierarchy. Otherwise, ABL raises a compiler
               error.
   interface-body
               The body of an interface definition is composed of the following types of elements:
               •    Temp-table or ProDataSet object definitions used as parameters by one or more methods whose
                    prototype is declared in this interface
               •    Method prototypes for common methods implemented by one or more classes
               •    Property prototypes for common properties implemented by one or more classes
               •    Event prototypes for common events implemented by one or more classes

Define elements in the interface body using the following syntax:

    [ { temp-table | dataset } ... ]
    [ method-prototypes ]
    [ property-prototypes ]
    [ event-prototypes ]
    END [ INTERFACE ].


temp-table | dataset
Specifies one or more temp-table or ProDataSet object definitions used as parameters by one or more
methods declared in this interface. You must specify these object definitions before any method
prototypes. The AVM does not allocate memory for these object definitions. You cannot specify an
access mode for these object definitions. These object definitions cannot be inherited from a super
interface; they are private to the interface in which they are defined.
The definition of temp-table and ProDataSet object parameters for methods defined in any classes that
implement this interface must match the temp-table or ProDataSet object definitions in this interface.
For temp-table objects:
•   The temp-tables must have the same number of fields, and each field must match with respect to
    the data type, extent, and position. Neither the table names nor field names must match.
•   The temp-tables must have the same number of indexes, and each index component must match,
    including the index names. However, the index-component field names do not need to match.
For ProDataSet objects:
•   The ProDataSet objects must have the same number of member buffers, and the buffers must be
    in the same order. Neither the buffer names nor ProDataSet names must match.
•   The temp-tables of these buffers must match as described above.
method-prototypes
Declares one or more method prototypes in the interface. A method prototype declares a method of a
class without an implementation (that is, without specifying the method's logic or the END METHOD
statement).
 Note the following:
•   The method access mode must be PUBLIC, either explicitly declared or defaulted.
•   The method prototype must not include the STATIC, ABSTRACT, or FINAL options.
•   The OVERRIDE option can only be specified for methods that are defined in
    Progress.Lang.Object, however this is not required.
The implementation of these method prototypes, in classes that implement this interface, must not
include the STATIC option and must match these declarations with respect to:
•   Access mode, which must be PUBLIC
•   Return type
•   The number, data type, and access mode of any parameters
property-prototypes
Declares one or more property prototypes in the interface. A property prototype declares a property
of a class without implementing its GET or SET accessors (that is, without specifying the property's
logic). You must specify a property prototype with a PUBLIC access mode. The property prototype
must include either a GET and SET accessor, or a GET accessor, or a SET accessor. Although the
property declaration cannot have accessor implementations, the property when implemented in a class
may include an accessor implementation.

           Note the following:
            •   The property access mode must be PUBLIC, either explicitly declared or defaulted.
            •   The property prototype must not include the STATIC, ABSTRACT, OVERRIDE, or INITIAL
                options.
            •   Accessors must not include access modifiers.
            •   Accessors must not include implementations.
            The implementation of the property, in classes that implement this interface, must not include the
            STATIC option and must match these declarations with respect to:
            •   Access mode, which must be PUBLIC
            •   Name
            •   Data type or type name
            •   EXTENT — Its presence or absence, determinate or indeterminate, and size (if determinate)
            •   Accessors — Any accessor appearing in the interface, plus the option of any additional accessor
                not specified in the interface, all defaulting to PUBLIC access mode
            •   Presence or absence of NO-UNDO
            event-prototypes
            Declares one or more event prototypes in the interface. An event prototype declares a class event that
            the class must implement with an identical declaration, allowing the class to publish the event.
            For information on the syntax for event-prototype, see the DEFINE EVENT statement on page 335
            reference entry for declaring class event prototypes. Note the following:
            •   The event access mode must be PUBLIC, either explicitly declared or defaulted.
            •   The event prototype must not include the STATIC, ABSTRACT, or OVERRIDE options.
            The implementation of these event prototypes, in classes that implement this interface, must not include
            the STATIC option and must match these declarations with respect to:
            •   Access mode, which must be PUBLIC
            •   Any specified .NET delegate type or the number, data type, and access mode of any specified
                parameters
            END [ INTERFACE ]
            Specifies the end of the interface body definition. You must end the interface body definition with the
            END statement.

Examples
The following samples include two different class definitions that provide similar functionality, but in distinctly different
ways. Each class implements the same interface and both classes define a ProDataSet data member (dsHighCustData)
used to retrieve Defines the type name for a user-defined interface type. Specify an ABL interface type name as described
in the Customer and related Invoice table data for a single Customer record from the Sports2020 database.
However, each class selects the Customer record using a different and functionally distinct algorithm provided in its
own implementation of the same interface method prototype.
Thus, each of the following sample class files implements the r-ICustObj interface type defined in the class definition
file, r-ICustObj.cls and provides the following functionality:
1. r-ICustObjImpl.cls — Defines the r-ICustObjImpl class, which retrieves data from the single Customer
   and related Invoice records that contain the highest balance value represented by the Customer.Balance
   value. This functionality is almost identical to what is provided by the r-CustObj.cls sample class file that is
   fully described in the Examples section of the CLASS statement on page 132 reference entry. (The main differences
   from the r-ICustObjImpl class are that the r-CustObj class does not implement an interface type and it is
   defined as FINAL.)
                                                                                                   
2. r-ICustObjImpl2.cls — Defines the r-ICustObjImpl2 class, which also retrieves data from a single
   Customer and related Invoice records. However, this class retrieves data for the Customer whose related
   InvoiceDefines the type name for a user-defined interface type. Specify records contain the highest Invoice
   balance represented by the sum of their Invoice.Amount values.
Following is the interface definition provided by the sample r-ICustObj.cls file.
r-ICustObj.cls

  INTERFACE r-ICustObj:

     /* Property prototypes            to return basic values for the Customer
        identified with the            highest balance in the database */
     DEFINE PUBLIC PROPERTY            HighCustBalance AS DECIMAL NO-UNDO
       GET.
       SET.
     DEFINE PUBLIC PROPERTY            HighCustNum AS INTEGER NO-UNDO
       GET.
       SET.

     /* Event prototype to notify about Customers with Invoices */
     DEFINE PUBLIC EVENT CustHasInvoices
       SIGNATURE VOID ( piCustNum AS INTEGER ).

     /* Temp-tables for the ProDataSet parameter */
     DEFINE TEMP-TABLE ttCust NO-UNDO LIKE Customer.
     DEFINE TEMP-TABLE ttInv NO-UNDO LIKE Invoice.

     /* ProDataSet parameter for passing a single Customer with the highest
        balance along with its related Invoices */
     DEFINE DATASET dsHighCustData FOR ttCust, ttInv
       DATA-RELATION FOR ttCust, ttInv
         RELATION-FIELDS (ttCust.CustNum, ttInv.CustNum).

     /* Method prototype to get the current high Customer balance data */
     METHOD PUBLIC VOID GetHighCustomerData
       ( OUTPUT DATASET dsHighCustData BIND ).

     /* Method prototype to set (or reset) the current high Customer data */
     METHOD PUBLIC VOID SetHighCustomerData ( ).

  END INTERFACE.


The implementations of the SetHighCustomerData( ) method populate the ProDataSet with selected fields from
Customer and Invoice records, where the selected Customer also has related invoices. Each implementation of
SetHighCustomerData( ) also sets the two implemented properties (HighCustBalance and HighCustNum)
to appropriate values for the selected Customer, and publishes the implemented class event (CustHasInvoices)
for each Customer record it encounters with related Invoice records. Each class defines additional data members
to support its instance of the ProDataSet, and also must implement the GetHighCustomerData( ) method (according
to the interface) to pass the ProDataSet as a by-reference output parameter.
Following is the interface implementation provided by the r-ICustObjImpl sample class. Note that the property
implementations add initial values, but rely on default behavior for the accessors. The class also fully defines the
ProDataSet to be passed as a by-reference method output parameter.
                    


r-ICustObjImpl.cls


CLASS r-ICustObjImpl IMPLEMENTS r-ICustObj:

  /* Public properties to return basic values for a customer with the
     highest balance */
  DEFINE PUBLIC PROPERTY HighCustBalance AS DECIMAL INITIAL 0.0 NO-UNDO
    GET.
    SET.
  DEFINE PUBLIC PROPERTY HighCustNum AS INTEGER INITIAL ? NO-UNDO
    GET.
    SET.

  /* Public event to notify about Customers with Invoices */
  DEFINE PUBLIC EVENT CustHasInvoices
    SIGNATURE VOID ( piCustNum AS INTEGER ).

  /* Private handle variable for the high customer ProDataSet */
  DEFINE PRIVATE VARIABLE hHighCustData AS HANDLE NO-UNDO.

  /* Private temp-tables for the high customer ProDataSet */
  DEFINE PRIVATE TEMP-TABLE ttCust NO-UNDO LIKE Customer.
  DEFINE PRIVATE TEMP-TABLE ttInv NO-UNDO LIKE Invoice.

  /* Private ProDataSet for a single customer with the highest
     balance and its invoices */
  DEFINE PRIVATE DATASET dsHighCustData FOR ttCust, ttInv
    DATA-RELATION FOR ttCust, ttInv
      RELATION-FIELDS (ttCust.CustNum, ttInv.CustNum).

  /* Private query and data sources for the ProDataSet */
  DEFINE PRIVATE QUERY qCust FOR Customer.
  DEFINE PRIVATE DATA-SOURCE srcCust FOR QUERY qCust.
  DEFINE PRIVATE DATA-SOURCE srcInv FOR Invoice.

  /* Constructor to initialize handles and attach data sources */
  CONSTRUCTOR r-ICustObjImpl ( ):

    hHighCustData = DATASET dsHighCustData:HANDLE.
    BUFFER ttCust:ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE( DATA-SOURCE srcCust:HANDLE ).
    BUFFER ttInv:ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE( DATA-SOURCE srcInv:HANDLE ).

  END CONSTRUCTOR.

/* Public method to get the current high customer data */
  METHOD PUBLIC VOID GetHighCustomerData
    ( OUTPUT DATASET dsHighCustData BIND ):

  END METHOD.

  /* Public method to set (or reset) the current high customer data */
  METHOD PUBLIC VOID SetHighCustomerData ( ):

    hHighCustData:EMPTY-DATASET( ).
    FOR EACH Customer: /* Find Customer with highest balance */
      FIND FIRST Invoice WHERE Invoice.CustNum = Customer.CustNum NO-ERROR.
      IF AVAILABLE Invoice THEN DO:
         IF Customer.Balance > HighCustBalance THEN
           ASSIGN HighCustBalance = Customer.Balance
                   HighCustNum     = Customer.CustNum.
         CustHasInvoices:Publish( Customer.CustNum ).
      END.
    END.
    QUERY qCust:QUERY-PREPARE("FOR EACH Customer "
          + "WHERE Customer.CustNum = " + STRING(HighCustNum) ).
        hHighCustData:FILL( ).

     END METHOD.

  END CLASS.


The bold code inside the SetHighCustomerData( ) method shows the difference in implementation from the
same method implemented by the following r-ICustObjImpl2 sample class. Here, it relies on the stored value of
the Customer.Balance field to determine each Customer balance and assigns the HighCustBalance and
HighCustNum property values accordingly.
The following r-ICustObjProc.p sample procedure shows an application of the r-ICustObjImpl class, which
responds to the CustHasInvoices class event and displays the contents of the dsHighCustCata ProDataSet.
Note that it defines a reference-only instance of the ProDataSet as required by the class and its interface. 

   r-ICustObjProc.p

  DEFINE TEMP-TABLE ttCust NO-UNDO REFERENCE-ONLY LIKE Customer.
  DEFINE TEMP-TABLE ttInv NO-UNDO REFERENCE-ONLY LIKE Invoice.

  DEFINE DATASET dsHighCustDataREFERENCE-ONLY FOR ttCust, ttInv
    DATA-RELATION FOR ttCust, ttInv
      RELATION-FIELDS (ttCust.CustNum, ttInv.CustNum).

  DEFINE VARIABLE rObj AS CLASS r-ICustObjImpl NO-UNDO.

  rObj = NEW r-ICustObjImpl( ) NO-ERROR.
  rObj:CustHasInvoices:Subscribe( "CustHasInvoices_Handler" ) NO-ERROR.

  MESSAGE "High Customer Number:" rObj:HighCustNum SKIP
          "High Customer Balance:" rObj:HighCustBalance VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.

  rObj:SetHighCustomerData( ) NO-ERROR.

  MESSAGE "High Customer Number:" rObj:HighCustNum SKIP
          "High Customer Balance:" rObj:HighCustBalance VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.

  rObj:GetHighCustomerData( OUTPUT DATASET dsHighCustData BIND ) NO-ERROR.

  CURRENT-WINDOW:WIDTH-CHARS = 90.

  FOR EACH ttCust, EACH ttInv BREAK BY ttInv.CustNum:
    DISPLAY ttCust.CustNum WHEN FIRST-OF(ttInv.CustNum)
             ttCust.Name WHEN FIRST-OF(ttInv.CustNum)
             ttCust.Balance WHEN FIRST-OF(ttInv.CustNum)
             ttInv.InvoiceNum ttInv.Amount SKIP
       WITH FRAME A WIDTH 90 DOWN
            TITLE "Customer with highest stored balance" NO-ERROR.
  END.

  PROCEDURE CustHasInvoices_Handler:
    DEFINE INPUT PARAMETER pCustNum AS INTEGER.

    FIND FIRST Customer WHERE Customer.CustNum = pCustNum NO-ERROR.
    IF AVAILABLE Customer THEN
      MESSAGE "Customer" Customer.CustNum ('"' + Customer.Name + '"')
              "has a stored balance of" Customer.Balance
              "and also has Invoices."
              VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.

  END PROCEDURE.


Following is the interface implementation provided by the r-ICustObjImpl2 sample class. This implementation is
identical to r-ICustObjImpl except for the SetHighCustomerData( ) method.
                  

r-ICustObjImpl2.cls


CLASS r-ICustObjImpl2 IMPLEMENTS r-ICustObj:

  /* Public properties to return basic values for a customer with the
     highest balance */
  DEFINE PUBLIC PROPERTY HighCustBalance AS DECIMAL INITIAL 0.0 NO-UNDO
    GET.
    SET.
  DEFINE PUBLIC PROPERTY HighCustNum AS INTEGER INITIAL ? NO-UNDO
    GET.
    SET.

  /* Public event to notify about Customers with Invoices */
  DEFINE PUBLIC EVENT CustHasInvoices
    SIGNATURE VOID ( piCustNum AS INTEGER ).

  /* Private handle variable for the high customer ProDataSet */
  DEFINE PRIVATE VARIABLE hHighCustData AS HANDLE NO-UNDO.

  /* Private temp-tables for the high customer ProDataSet */
  DEFINE PRIVATE TEMP-TABLE ttCust NO-UNDO LIKE Customer.
  DEFINE PRIVATE TEMP-TABLE ttInv NO-UNDO LIKE Invoice.

  /* Private ProDataSet for a single customer with the highest
     balance and its invoices */
  DEFINE PRIVATE DATASET dsHighCustData FOR ttCust, ttInv
    DATA-RELATION FOR ttCust, ttInv
      RELATION-FIELDS (ttCust.CustNum, ttInv.CustNum).

  /* Private query and data sources for the ProDataSet */
  DEFINE PRIVATE QUERY qCust FOR Customer.
  DEFINE PRIVATE DATA-SOURCE srcCust FOR QUERY qCust.
  DEFINE PRIVATE DATA-SOURCE srcInv FOR Invoice.

  /* Constructor to initialize handles and attach data sources */
  CONSTRUCTOR r-ICustObjImpl2 ( ):

    hHighCustData = DATASET dsHighCustData:HANDLE.
    BUFFER ttCust:ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE( DATA-SOURCE srcCust:HANDLE ).
    BUFFER ttInv:ATTACH-DATA-SOURCE( DATA-SOURCE srcInv:HANDLE ).

  END CONSTRUCTOR.

 /* Public method to get the current high customer data */
  METHOD PUBLIC VOID GetHighCustomerData
    ( OUTPUT DATASET dsHighCustData BIND ):

  END METHOD.

  /* Public method to set (or reset) the current high customer data */
  METHOD PUBLIC VOID SetHighCustomerData ( ):

    DEFINE VARIABLE dBalance AS DECIMAL NO-UNDO.

    hHighCustData:EMPTY-DATASET( ).
    /* Find Customer with highest total Invoice balance */
    FOR EACH Customer:
      ASSIGN dBalance = 0.0.
      FOR EACH Invoice WHERE Invoice.CustNum = Customer.CustNum:
        ASSIGN dBalance = dBalance + Invoice.Amount.
      END.
      IF dBalance > HighCustBalance THEN
        ASSIGN HighCustBalance = dBalance

                    HighCustNum     = Customer.CustNum.
         IF dBalance > 0.0 THEN
            CustHasInvoices:Publish( Customer.CustNum ).
       END.
       QUERY qCust:QUERY-PREPARE("FOR EACH Customer "
         + "WHERE Customer.CustNum = " + STRING(HighCustNum) ).
       hHighCustData:FILL( ).

    END METHOD.

  END CLASS.


The bold code inside the SetHighCustomerData( ) method shows the difference in implementation from the
same method implemented by the previous r-ICustObjImpl sample class. Here, it calculates the Customer balance
from the total of Invoice.Amount values in its related Invoice records and assigns the HighCustBalance and
HighCustNum property values accordingly.
The following r-ICustObjProc2.p sample procedure shows an application of the r-ICustObjImpl2 class,
which is very similar to the previous procedure, r-ICustObjProc.p. The differences include displaying both the
stored Customer.Balance value and the Invoice.Amount total for the selected Customer record, as well as
some cosmetic changes to the display. Otherwise, the application is identical.

r-ICustObjProc2.p

    DEFINE TEMP-TABLE ttCust NO-UNDO REFERENCE-ONLY LIKE Customer.
    DEFINE TEMP-TABLE ttInv NO-UNDO REFERENCE-ONLY LIKE Invoice.

    DEFINE DATASET dsHighCustData REFERENCE-ONLY FOR ttCust, ttInv
      DATA-RELATION FOR ttCust, ttInv
        RELATION-FIELDS (ttCust.CustNum, ttInv.CustNum).

    DEFINE VARIABLE rObj AS CLASS r-ICustObjImpl2 NO-UNDO.

    rObj = NEW r-ICustObjImpl2( ) NO-ERROR.
    rObj:CustHasInvoices:Subscribe( "CustHasInvoices_Handler" ) NO-ERROR.

    MESSAGE "High Customer Number:" rObj:HighCustNum SKIP
            "High Invoice Balance:" rObj:HighCustBalance VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.

    rObj:SetHighCustomerData( ) NO-ERROR.

    MESSAGE "High Customer Number:" rObj:HighCustNum SKIP
            "High Invoice Balance:" rObj:HighCustBalance VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.

    rObj:GetHighCustomerData( OUTPUT DATASET dsHighCustData BIND ) NO-ERROR.

    CURRENT-WINDOW:WIDTH-CHARS = 100.

    FOR EACH ttCust, EACH ttInv BREAK BY ttInv.CustNum:
      DISPLAY ttCust.CustNum WHEN FIRST-OF(ttInv.CustNum)
                 COLUMN-LABEL "Customer!Number"
               ttCust.Name WHEN FIRST-OF(ttInv.CustNum)
               ttCust.Balance WHEN FIRST-OF(ttInv.CustNum)
                 COLUMN-LABEL "Stored!Balance"
               ttInv.InvoiceNum COLUMN-LABEL "Invoice!Number"
               ttInv.Amount (SUB-TOTAL BY ttInv.CustNum) SKIP
         WITH FRAME A WIDTH 100 DOWN
              TITLE "Customer with highest total Invoice balance" NO-ERROR.
    END.

    PROCEDURE CustHasInvoices_Handler:
      DEFINE INPUT PARAMETER pCustNum AS INTEGER.

      FIND FIRST Customer WHERE Customer.CustNum = pCustNum NO-ERROR.
      IF AVAILABLE Customer THEN
        MESSAGE "Customer" Customer.CustNum ('"' + Customer.Name + '"')
                "has a stored balance of" Customer.Balance
                "and also has Invoices."
                VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.

    END PROCEDURE.



Notes
•   You can terminate an INTERFACE statement with either a period (.) or a colon (:), but typically use a colon (:).
•   A class definition (.cls) file can contain only one interface definition that is optionally preceded by one or more
    USING statements. The complete interface definition must begin with the INTERFACE statement and end with the
    END statement, and the INTERFACE statement must be the first compilable statement after any USING statements
    in the file. A class definition file containing an interface definition cannot also contain a class definition.
•   The access mode for an interface definition is always PUBLIC.
                                                                                                     
   •   The compiled version of an interface definition file is an r-code (.r) file. 
   •   You can define an object reference variable for an interface, which lets you reference a class that implements the
       interface, but you cannot create an instance of an interface with the NEW function (classes) .
   •   You can reference include files from within an interface definition. For more information about include files, see
       the { } Include file reference on page 27 entry.
   •   All built-in preprocessor directives are supported in interface definitions.
   •   All built-in preprocessor names are supported in interface definitions. For a list of preprocessor name, see the { }
       Preprocessor name reference on page 30 entry.
   •   You cannot pass compile-time arguments to interface definition files. However, you can pass compile-time arguments
       to include files referenced in an interface definition file.
   •   You can store class definition r-code files in ABL libraries (procedure libraries (.pl) or archive files (.apl). If
       ABL encounters a library on the PROPATH, it will search the library for the specified r-code. However, you cannot
       execute r-code files stored in a library that is not on the PROPATH using the library-path<<member-name>> syntax.
   •   While a property interface declaration may include a GET and SET accessor, or a GET accessor, or a SET accessor,
       you cannot force the property to NOT have a particular accessor in an implementing class. However, you can force
       the accessor to be missing when an instance of the class is used through an interface reference. You can do this by
       omitting the accessor in the property interface definition. Even though the accessor might be implemented in the
       class property, it will appear, when used through an interface reference, that the accessor implementation does not
       exist.


METHOD statement
   Defines a method of a class, declares a method prototype in an ABL interface, or overrides a method inherited from an
   ABL or .NET super class. A method is a class member that, when invoked by name, can execute code and return a value
   similar to a user-defined function. The description that follows begins with the general syntax for defining a method.
   Note: This statement is applicable only when used in a class or interface definition (.cls) file.

   Syntax

     METHOD [ PRIVATE | PACKAGE-PRIVATE | PROTECTED | PACKAGE-PROTECTED | PUBLIC
     ]
       [ STATIC | ABSTRACT ] [ OVERRIDE ][ FINAL ]
       { VOID |return-type}method-name
       ( [ parameter [ , parameter ]...] ) :

        method-body


   Use the following syntax to declare an interface method prototype:

     METHOD [ PUBLIC ]
       { VOID |return-type}method-name
       ( [ parameter [ , parameter ]...] ) .


   Use the following syntax to declare an abstract method prototype:

     METHOD [ PACKAGE-PRIVATE | PROTECTED | PACKAGE-PROTECTED | PUBLIC ]
       [ OVERRIDE ] ABSTRACT
       { VOID |return-type}method-name
       ( [ parameter [ , parameter ]...] ) .


   [ PRIVATE | PACKAGE-PRIVATE | PROTECTED | PACKAGE-PROTECTED | PUBLIC ]
               Specifies the access mode for this method.
               A PRIVATE method can be called by the defining class. An instance can call the private method of
               another instance if they are both from the same class. A PACKAGE-PRIVATE method can be called
               from within the class and any class within its package. A PROTECTED method can be called by the
               defining class and any of its derived classes. A PACKAGE-PROTECTED method can be called from
               within the class, any class within its package, and from within any subclass that inherits the class. A
               PUBLIC method can be called from any code (in a class or a procedure) that has access to a class
               instance.
               The default access mode is PUBLIC.

           When declaring an interface method prototype, the access mode for this method must be PUBLIC (the
           default).
           When defining an abstract method, the access mode for the method cannot be PRIVATE.
           If this method is defined with the OVERRIDE option, the access mode must not be more restrictive
           than the access mode defined for the overridden ABL or .NET super class method. The following table
           shows what access mode you can use on an OVERRIDE method in an ABL class when the method
           being overridden is .NET:

            .NET                                                ABL
            protected                                           PROTECTED, PACKAGE-PROTECTED,
                                                                PUBLIC
            protected internal                                  PROTECTED, PACKAGE-PROTECTED,
                                                                PUBLIC
            public                                              PUBLIC

[ STATIC ]
          Defines a method that is a static member of the class type for which it is defined and that is scoped to
          the ABL session where it is referenced. You can call an accessible static method in any piece of code.
           Without this option, ABL defines an instance method that is scoped to a single instance of the class
           where it is defined. You can call any public instance method (abstract or non-abstract) in any procedure,
           or in any instance or static method defined inside or outside of the class where the instance property
           is defined. Any static method can call the public instance method only using an object reference to a
           class instance that defines the instance method as a member. If the referencing static method is defined
           in the same class as the public instance method, the class must instantiate itself in order to have access
           to an instance reference.
                     The STATIC option is not valid when you:
           •   Define or implement an abstract method
           •   Declare an interface method prototype
           •   Implement an interface method
           Note: The access mode modifier and the STATIC/ABSTRACT modifier can appear in either order,
           e.g., METHOD STATIC PUBLIC VOID myMethod():... is valid syntax.
[ ABSTRACT ]
        Defines the method as an abstract member of the class type for which it is defined. The defining class
        type must also be abstract. If you define an abstract method, it has the following requirements:
           •   You must specify the OVERRIDE option if an inherited method (abstract or otherwise) has the
               same name and signature.
           •   You can specify any access mode other than PRIVATE.
           •   The abstract method must be overridden and implemented in a derived class.
           Any class definition for an instance method that includes the OVERRIDE option and does not include
           the ABSTRACT option defines a method implementation. If it also includes the ABSTRACT option,
           the inherited method remains or is redefined as abstract.
           This option is not valid either when you define a static method or you declare an interface method
           prototype.
[ OVERRIDE ]
        Specifies one of the following:

              •   This instance method overrides the behavior of another instance method inherited from an ABL
                  or .NET class.
              •   This instance method implements, or overrides the behavior of, an abstract method inherited from
                  an ABL or .NET abstract class.
              •   This instance method redefines as abstract an implemented method inherited from an ABL or .NET
                  class.
                  Note: A .NET abstract class is defined in C# with the abstract keyword.
              •   This static method redefines the behavior of another static method implemented in a super class.
              When you specify OVERRIDE, the method signature must match the overridden method with respect
              to the name, return type, and the number, types, and modes of its parameters. In addition, the access
              mode cannot be more restrictive than the access mode of the super class method it overrides. When
              overriding a .NET method, the return type and parameters must also map appropriately to the inherited
              .NET method return type and parameters. For more information, see the description of the return-type
              and parameter options.
              If you are overriding an inherited abstract method and you specify the ABSTRACT option, your
              overriding method is also defined as abstract, and it must be implemented in a class derived from the
              defining class. Note that you do not have to override an inherited abstract method that you want to
              remain abstract as long as the inheriting class is also abstract. However, doing so allows you to specify
              a less restrictive access mode for the abstract method.
              If you do not specify the ABSTRACT option when overriding an inherited abstract method, your method
              definition implements the abstract method.
              If you are overriding an inherited method that already has an implementation and you specify the
              ABSTRACT option, your overriding method redefines the inherited method as abstract, and it must,
              again, be implemented in a class derived from the defining class. Note that to redefine an inherited
              method as abstract that already has an implementation, the defining class must also be abstract.
              Note that instance methods do not override static methods and static methods do not redefine instance
              methods. For more information about overriding and redefining methods, see Develop Object-oriented
              ABL Applications.
              You can only override methods of a .NET super class that, in C# terms, are:
              •   Declared as virtual or abstract
              •   Declared as public, protected or protected internal
              •   Not declared as static or sealed (FINAL)
              For an interface, the OVERRIDE option can only be specified for methods that are defined in
              Progress.Lang.Object, however this is not required.
[ FINAL ]
              Indicates this method cannot be overridden or redefined by a method defined in an inheriting subclass.
              This option is not valid either when you define an abstract method or when you declare an interface
              method prototype.
VOID
              Indicates this method does not return a value.
return-type
              Indicates the data type of the method return value. You can specify return-type as one of the following
              data types. For more information on each data type, see the Data types on page 258 reference entry:

                  { CHARACTER | COM-HANDLE | DATE | DATETIME | DATETIME-TZ
                    | DECIMAL | HANDLE | INT64 | INTEGER | LOGICAL | LONGCHAR
                    | MEMPTR | RAW | RECID | ROWID |AS-data-type
                    |[ CLASS ]object-type-name }[ EXTENT [constant]]


           AS-data-type
           If you are defining the return type for a method that overrides a .NET super class method (abstract or
           otherwise) or implements a method defined in a .NET interface, return-type must specify the exact
           return type of the overridden or implemented .NET method. 

           Note: At run time, a method return type defined using an AS-data-type keyword behaves in ABL like
           the corresponding ABL primitive type.
           Also note that when overriding or implementing a .NET array return value, you must specify the .NET
           array object type (for example, "System.Int32[]" or "System.Byte[]"); you cannot use
           an ABL array equivalent (for example, INTEGER EXTENT or UNSIGNED-BYTE EXTENT).
           object-type-name
           Specifies the type name of an ABL or .NET class or interface. Specify an object type name using the
           syntax described in the Type-name syntax on page 1011 reference entry. With an appropriate USING
           statement, you can also specify a class or interface name alone, without the qualifying
           package or namespace.
           If you are defining the return type for a method that overrides a .NET super class method (abstract or
           otherwise), or that implements a method defined in a .NET interface, object-type-name must specify
           the exact return type of the overridden or implemented .NET method. However, for .NET inner (nested)
           type, note the difference in the ABL syntax, which replaces the corresponding period (.) in the .NET
           object type with a plus (+) (see the Type-name syntax on page 1011 reference entry).
           Also note that when overriding or implementing a .NET array return value, you must specify the .NET
           array object type (for example, "System.Drawing.Point[]"); you cannot use an ABL array
           equivalent (such as System.Drawing.Point EXTENT).
           [ CLASS ]
           If the specified class or interface type name conflicts with an abbreviation of a built-in primitive type
           name, such as INT for INTEGER, you must specify the CLASS keyword.
           For a class or interface return value, ABL returns an object reference associated with the class or
           interface, not a class instance itself. 
           [ EXTENT [constant ]]
           Defines the return value as an array of data elements with a primitive or object data type. This option
           can specify an array return value as either determinate (has a defined number of elements) or
           indeterminate (has an undefined number of elements). To define a determinate array return value,
           specify the EXTENT option with the constant argument. This optional argument is an integer value
           that represents the number of elements in the array. To define an indeterminate array return value,
           specify the EXTENT option without the constant argument. For more information about determinate
           and indeterminate arrays, see Work with one-dimensional arrays in Basic ABL.
           If you do not use the EXTENT option (or you specify constant as 0), the return value is not an array
           return value.
method-name
         The method name. This name must be unique among all methods defined in the class hierarchy of the
         defining class, unless the method:
           •   Includes the OVERRIDE option to override an inherited method.
                                                                                                    
           •   Overloads a method in the defining class or in any super class within its inherited class hierarchy.
               In this case, the parameter list must differ from that of every other method with the same name in
               the defining class, and it must differ from that of every other method with the same name defined
               in every super class of the defining class.
           Note: Members of a class are grouped into six namespaces, including buffers/temp-tables, methods,
           variables/properties/events, ProDataSets, queries, and data-sources. Methods defined as members of
           a class share the same namespace. There can be only one class member in this namespace with a given
           name. If the method is defined in a class that is derived from a .NET class, other restrictions on
           method-name apply. For more information, see the Notes in this reference entry.
( [ parameter [ , parameter]...] )
           Defines zero or more parameters of the method.
           If this method is one of several overloaded methods, the parameter list must be unique among all
           methods defined in the class hierarchy of the defining class. This uniqueness can be established using
           a different combination of number, data types, or modes for the parameters. Note that both instance
           and static methods overload one another within the class hierarchy.
           If this method implements an interface method prototype or overrides an inherited method (using the
           OVERRIDE option), the parameter list must match the parameter list of the interface method or the
           method this is overriding.
           If the method implements a .NET interface method prototype or overrides an inherited .NET method
           (abstract or otherwise), you must explicitly map any .NET mapped types specified for parameters of
           the .NET method (see Table 25: Explicit mappings between ABL and .NET data types on page 269).
           Note that at run time, any explicitly mapped parameter behaves like the corresponding ABL primitive
           type.
           For more information on the syntax of parameter, establishing uniqueness for method overloading,
           and on mapping .NET parameter types, see the Parameter definition syntax on page 778 reference entry.
method-body
          The body for a method implementation. For an interface method prototype or an abstract method, you
          cannot specify method-body. For more information about declaring method prototypes in an interface,
          see the INTERFACE statement on page 644 reference entry.
           Define method-body using the following syntax:

               method-logic
                      .
                      .
                      .
                   [catch-block[catch-block...]]
                   [finally-block]
               END [ METHOD ] .


           method-logic
           The logic of the method. This logic can contain the ABL statements that are allowed within a procedure
           block, including class-related statements.
           If you define the method to return a value of the data type specified by return-type, you can execute
           the RETURN statement to set a value of that data type to return at run time. If return-type
           is defined as a .NET array of mapped types (for example, "System.Byte[]"), you must return an
           object reference of the specified .NET array of mapped types in the RETURN statement. You cannot
           return an ABL array of a type that maps to the .NET array type (for example, INTEGER EXTENT)
           or the AVM raises a run-time error. If you do not execute any RETURN statement for return-type in
           the method-logic, the method returns the Unknown value (?) as its return value.

           If you are defining an instance method with the OVERRIDE option, you can also call the overridden
           implementation of this method in the class hierarchy using the SUPER system reference. You can also
           optionally call any instance method defined in the same class using the THIS-OBJECT system
           reference.
           If you are defining a static method, you cannot access any instance members of a class (including the
           defining class) nor can you use the SUPER and THIS-OBJECT system references. From a static
           method, you can access only other static members of a class and the local variables or other local data
           elements of the method.
           Each logic statement must end with a period.
           catch-block
           Specifies a CATCH statement that defines error handling code for one or more error types. A DO block
           does not have any default error handling. Therefore, a DO block must have error handling options
           specified such that it becomes an undo-able block. Otherwise, ABL generates a compiler warning.
           For more information on catch-block, see the CATCH statement on page 113 reference entry.
           finally-block
           Specifies a FINALLY statement that defines the processing that must occur after all other processing
           in the block occurs. For more information on finally-block, see the FINALLY statement on page 517
           reference entry.
           END [ METHOD ]
           Specifies the end of the method body definition. You must end the method body definition with the
           END statement.

Examples
The following example shows the definition of an instance method in a class (which might implement a method prototype
declared in an interface, as depicted in the second example):

  METHOD PUBLIC CHARACTER GetCustomerName (INPUT inCustNum AS INTEGER):

     FIND ttCust WHERE ttCust.CustNum = inCustNum NO-ERROR.
     IF AVAILABLE ttCust THEN
       RETURN ttCust.CustName.
     ELSE
       RETURN ?.

  END METHOD.


The following example shows the definition of a method prototype declaration in an interface (which can be implemented
by an instance method definition in a class, as depicted in the first example):

  INTERFACE acme.myObjs.Interfaces.ICustObj:

     METHOD PUBLIC CHARACTER GetCustomerName (INPUT inCustNum AS INTEGER).

  END INTERFACE.


For more examples of method definitions, including static and abstract methods, see the descriptions of r-CustObj.cls,
r-CustObjStatic.cls, and r-CustObjAbstract.cls in the CLASS statement on page 132 reference entry.


Notes
•   You can terminate a METHOD statement with either a period (.) or a colon (:), but typically use a colon (:) for a
    method definition (in a class) and a period (.) for a method prototype (in an interface).
•   A complete method definition must begin with the METHOD statement and end with the END statement.
•   A method of a class can invoke another method of a class (instance or static, as appropriate), as well as an internal
    or external procedure or a user-defined function. Similarly, a procedure or user-defined function can invoke a method
    of a class. Note that if method-name is an ABL reserved keyword, you might need to use the THIS-OBJECT system
    reference  or Type-name syntax  to call the method. 
•   Local variables and other data elements defined within a method are scoped to the end of the method definition. The
    values of local variables and data elements do not persist across method invocations; they are re-initialized each time
    you invoke the method. However, if you define a local variable within a method using the same name as a data
    member or property within the class hierarchy, the local variable takes precedence over the data member or property
    for the duration of the method.
•   When defining local variables and other data elements for any method, even one that overrides or implements a
    .NET method, you cannot define these elements using an AS data type (. You must use an ABL data type like any other method definition. The ABL
    data that you assign to or from a given .NET method parameter must be assignment compatible with the .NET type,
    as in all other contexts.
•   You cannot specify an access mode (for example, PUBLIC) for variable definitions in a method.
•   You cannot define SHARED objects, work tables, temp-tables, or ProDataSet objects within the body of a method.
•   ABL implements primitive and array parameters of methods as NO-UNDO variables.
•   You can handle application errors in a method as in any ABL block. By executing a RETURN ERROR action at the
    block level or a THROW action at the block level with the presence of a ROUTINE-LEVEL ON ERROR UNDO,
    THROW statement on page 895, the AVM returns the ERROR condition to the statement that invoked the method.
    If a RETURN ERROR also includes the option to return a character string value, or you set the ReturnValue
    property of a Progess.Lang.AppError object that you THROW, you can get this value using the
    RETURN-VALUE function following the statement that invoked the method or in a CATCH block that
    catches the Progress.Lang.AppError object.
•   You cannot override an inherited .NET generic method. However, you can create a non-generic ABL method of the
    same name (without a type parameter list).
•   You cannot override the following .NET methods:
    •   DestroyHandle( )
    •   Dispose( )
    •   Finalize( )
    •   GetHashCode( )
    In .NET, these methods are overridable. However, OpenEdge defines these methods as FINAL for an ABL session.
    Instead of overriding .NET methods (such as Dispose( )) that destroy or otherwise clean-up .NET resources,
    always use a destructor in the ABL class to manage class clean-up using these methods, even when inheriting from
    a .NET class. Similarly, if you want to return an ABL-processed value generated by GetHashCode( ), create a
    separate ABL method that calls GetHashCode( ) to return the value.
•   When you define a method in an ABL class that inherits a .NET class, you cannot define method-name as any of
    the following reserved method names (case insensitive) or ABL raises a compile-time error:
    •   Get_property-name( ) — Where property-name is the name of a property (including any default indexed
        property) defined by the .NET super class
        Note: For default indexed properties, property-name is usually Item.
    •   Set_property-name( ) — Where property-name is the name of a property (including any default indexed
        property) defined by the .NET super class
    •   Add_event-name( ) — Where event-name is the name of an event defined by the .NET super class
                                                    

       •   Remove_event-name( ) — Where event-name is the name of an event defined by the .NET super class
   •   When you raise error from within an ABL method that overrides a .NET method or implements a .NET method
       defined in a .NET interface, if the method is called from .NET, and ABL error options raise the error out of the
       method block, ABL returns a .NET System.Exception to the caller. If the error is raised by executing a RETURN
       ERROR with the optional error string, the Message property of the System.Exception describes the operation
       where the error occurred, but the error string is available only to the ABL session, using the RETURN-VALUE
       function. If the error is raised by executing a RETURN ERROR with an optional ABL error object or by executing
       an UNDO, THROW, the System.Exception:Message property includes both a description of the operation
       where the error occurred and any messages from the ABL error object. If the error is fatal, the AVM responds as for
       any ABL class, generating a protrace file and exiting the session.


NEW function (classes)
   Creates an instance of a class (object) and returns an object reference to that instance. You can use this object reference
   to access the PUBLIC data members, properties, and methods of the instance. For more information on object references,
   see the reference entry for a Class-based object reference on page 127.

   Syntax

       NEW object-type-name ( [ parameter[ , parameter ]...] )


   object-type-name
               Specifies the type name of the ABL or .NET class you want to instantiate. Specify a class type name
               using the syntax as described in the Type-name syntax on page 1011 reference entry. If object-type-name
               specifies a .NET object, it can be most any .NET class, with a few restrictions. For more information,
               see the Notes of this reference entry. The value of object-type-name is restricted to alphanumeric
               characters plus the symbols #, $, %, and _.
               If, without casting, you assign the NEW function value to a target data element, or pass the NEW function
               as input to a target routine parameter, object-type-name must specify one of the following classes:
               •   The same class type that is defined for the target
               •   A subclass of the class type that is defined for the target
               •   A class type that implements the interface type defined for the target
               If object-type-name specifies one of the following kinds of object types, ABL raises a compiler error:
               •   An interface type
               •   An abstract class type
   ( [ parameter[ , parameter ]...] )
               Specifies zero or more parameters passed to a PUBLIC instance constructor that is defined for the
               class. You must provide the parameters identified by the specified constructor, matched with respect
               to number, data type, and mode. To invoke a constructor that is overloaded in the class, you must
               specify sufficient information for each parameter to disambiguate it from all other constructors in the
               class. Otherwise, ABL raises an error identifying the ambiguity.
              

Examples
The following example shows how the NEW function can instantiate a class within an expression:

  DEFINE VARIABLE rObj AS Progress.Lang.Object.

  IF ( NEW Progress.Lang.Object( ) ):ToString( ) BEGINS "Progress" THEN
    MESSAGE "This object is making Progress..." VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.


This code fragment instantiates a Progress.Lang.Object in order to check if the string value returned from its
ToString( ) method begins with "Progress", and displays a message if it does.
The following example shows three (3) invocations of the NEW function.
r-newclass.p

  ROUTINE-LEVEL ON ERROR UNDO, THROW.

  FUNCTION ClassFunc RETURNS CLASS Progress.Lang.Object
    (INPUT iVal AS INTEGER):
    MESSAGE "iVal = " iVal VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.
    IF iVal MODULO 2 = 0 THEN
      RETURN NEW Progress.Lang.Object( ).
    ELSE
      RETURN?.
  END FUNCTION.

  RUN DisplayClass( NEW Progress.Lang.Object( ) ).

  PROCEDURE DisplayClass:
    DEFINE INPUT PARAMETER rObj AS CLASS Progress.Lang.Object.

     DEFINE VARIABLE cClass1 AS CHARACTER NO-UNDO.
     DEFINE VARIABLE cClass2 AS CHARACTER NO-UNDO.

     cClass1 = rObj:ToString( ).
     /* The ToString( ) call errors on an odd RANDOM input value */
     cClass2 = ( ClassFunc( RANDOM(1,100) ) ):ToString( ).

     MESSAGE "The " cClass1 " and " cClass2 " instances have the same
     class type."
       VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.

    CATCH e AS Progress.Lang.SysError:
      UNDO, THROW NEW Progress.Lang.AppError( "Application Error", 555 ).
    END CATCH.
  END PROCEDURE.


This r-newclass.p procedure runs an internal procedure (DisplayClass) that displays a message showing the
ToString( ) values of two different objects instantiated as the same class type (Progress.Lang.Object).
However, one of these objects is instantiated within a user-defined function (ClassFunc) that returns a valid object
reference or the Unknown value (?) in order to generate an error, depending on the input value of a RANDOM function.
When a valid object reference is returned, it is used to access the ToString( ) method of the instance in an expression.
When the Unknown value (?) is returned, this generates a run-time error when used as an object reference. The procedure
then catches the error and responds by throwing a Progress.Lang.AppError object that is also instantiated by a NEW
function invoked in an expression, and the error text is displayed as an error message when run in the OpenEdge Editor.
                                                                                                          
Notes
•   When you create an instance of a class, ABL invokes the specified constructor for the class. At this time, the object
    instance gets its own copy of the data members and properties defined in the class and in all classes within its inherited
    class hierarchy. In addition, the object instance is added to the session object chain referenced by the FIRST-OBJECT
    attribute or LAST-OBJECT attribute of the SESSION system handle.
•   The ABL Virtual Machine (AVM) automatically deletes (garbage collects) any class instance that you create with
    the NEW function some time after no reference to that object exists in the ABL session. However, you can force
    any class instance to be deleted immediately by using the DELETE OBJECT statement. 
•   You can assign the object reference value returned by the NEW function to an ABL data element (or target of a passed
    parameter) defined as a class type or interface type when the destination data element (or parameter target) is defined
    as the same class as, as a super class of, or as an interface implemented by the instantiated class. In any case, the
    target data element retains its defined class or interface type. 
•   You can use an object reference as a parameter or return type for methods, internal and external procedures, and
    user-defined functions (see the example).
•   You can pass an object reference as a parameter between an application server and an ABL client, although there
    are restrictions on the types of object you can pass. 
•   You can pass a temp-table or ProDataSet containing an object reference field as a parameter between an application
    server and an ABL client, as long as the objects themselves satisfy the restrictions described in the Parameter definition
    syntax.
•   You can only access PRIVATE class members using an object reference in instances of the class where the members
    are defined. You can only access PACKAGE-PRIVATE class members using an object reference in an instance of
    the class, or any class within its package, where the member is defined. You can only access PROTECTED class
    members using an object reference in an instance of the class or subclass where the member is defined. You can
    only access PACKAGE-PROTECTED class members using an object reference in an instance of the class, any class
    within its package, and from within any subclass that inherits the class, where the member is defined. To allow access
    outside of these situations, you must provide PUBLIC methods or properties to do so. 
•   Class-based object instances are not associated with handle-based objects, such as socket or procedure objects, and
    object references are not compatible with object handles. Thus, for example, you cannot use an object reference in
    any statement or function that returns a value of type HANDLE, and you cannot pass a procedure handle to a method
    that expects an object reference.
•   You can compare two object references for equality using the EQ (=) operator, which determines if two object
    references are referencing the same object instance. Two object references can be equal even when you define their
    data types for different classes in the same class hierarchy as long as they each point to the same class instance. So,
    if ClassA is a super class of ClassB, and two object references point to the same ClassB instance, if one object
    reference is defined with the ClassA data type and the other object reference is defined with the ClassB data type,
    the two object references are equal. However, if the ClassA object reference points to a different class instance
    than the ClassB object reference, the two object references are not equal. Two object references are also equal if
    they are both set to the Unknown value (?).
•   You can use the Equals( ) method in the Progress.Lang.Object class to compare the data members and
    properties of two object references, as long as this class provides an implementation of the Equals( ) method.
•   If object-type-name specifies a .NET object, note that in ABL you cannot instantiate the following .NET classes:
    •   Any .NET class that is defined in the default namespace, that is, where the class name is the complete object type
        name
    •   System.Threading.Thread or any class derived from it
    •   System.Delegate or any delegate type derived from it
•   If object-type-name specifies a GUI or non-GUI .NET object type, you can instantiate it within a non-GUI ABL
    session on Windows, including a:

       •    Character mode (CHUI) client
       •    Batch-mode client
       •    Progress Application Server (PAS) for OpenEdge instance
       However, you cannot block for any .NET object events or visualize any GUI objects in a non-GUI ABL session.
   •   This function can raise errors during the execution of constructors for the class being instantiated, or for any class
       in its inherited class hierarchy. For example:
       •    A constructor in the class hierarchy executes the RETURN statement with the ERROR option or the
            UNDO statement  with the THROW or RETURN ERROR options.
       •    The class definition file for the class, a super class, or an interface could not be found.
       •    The run-time parameters of the constructor for the class, or a constructor for a class in the inherited class hierarchy,
            are not compatible.
       When the AVM encounters one of these errors, and the constructor cannot create the class instance or its inherited
       class hierarchy, the AVM automatically invokes the destructor for any class that has already been constructed while
       building the class hierarchy for the object.
       For more information on errors raised by instantiating classes, see Develop Object-oriented ABL Applications.
   •   Any errors returned during class instantiation, including application errors returned by constructors executing RETURN
       ERROR or UNDO, THROW, are handled by the statement that invokes the NEW function. In any case, if a RETURN
       ERROR in the constructor of the instantiating class also returns an optional character string value, this value is
       available using the RETURN-VALUE function following the statement where this NEW function appears.
   •   You can use the NEW function in the VAR statement.



NEW statement
   Creates an instance of a class (object) using the NEW function and assigns its object reference to an appropriately defined
   ABL data element. Once assigned, you can use the object reference to access this class instance and its PUBLIC data
   members, properties, and methods. 
   Syntax

     object-reference = new-function [ NO-ERROR ]


   object-reference
               The name of an ABL data element to which you want to assign the object reference of a new instance
               of the class specified by new-function. This data element must be defined as a compatible class or
               interface type and can be one of the following:
               •   A temp-table field defined as a Progress.Lang.Object class type using the DEFINE TEMP-TABLE
                   statement.
            •   A variable scoped to the current procedure, user-defined function, or method of a class or an
                accessible class-based variable data member defined as a class or interface type using the VAR
                statement  or DEFINE VARIABLE statement.
            •   A parameter defined as a class or interface type for the current procedure, user-defined function,
                or method of a class using an appropriate DEFINE PARAMETER statement or
                Parameter definition syntax 
            •   An accessible and writable class-based property defined as a class or interface type using the
                DEFINE PROPERTY statement 
            To be compatible, the object type of object-reference must be:
            •   The same class type as the class instantiated by new-function
            •   A super class of the class instantiated by new-function
            •   An interface that is implemented by the class instantiated by new-function
new-function
            An invocation of the NEW function, which creates an instance of a specified class and returns an object
            reference to that instance. This is the syntax for the NEW function, where object-type-name must specify
            a class type consistent with the object type of object-reference: The value of new-function is restricted
            to alphanumeric characters plus the symbols #, $, %, and _.

                NEW object-type-name ( [ parameter[ , parameter ]...] )


            The parameter list specifies the class constructor that is used to instantiate the class. 
NO-ERROR
            The NO-ERROR option  is used to prevent the statement from raising ERROR and displaying
            error messages.
            For the NEW statement with NO-ERROR, if ERROR is raised, then the object-reference remains
            unchanged.

Example
The following code fragment shows the definition of a variable that is assigned to the object reference for a new class
instance:

    DEFINE VARIABLE myCustObj AS CLASS acme.myObjs.CustObj NO-UNDO.

    myCustObj = NEW acme.myObjs.CustObj ( ).



Notes
•   After the assignment, object-reference contains a copy of the object reference value returned by new-function, which
    points to the same object instance, not a copy of the object created by new-function.
•   Although you can assign an object reference to a temp-table field defined as a Progress.Lang.Object class type, you
    cannot assign an object reference to a field in a database table. For more information, see Develop Object-oriented
    ABL Applications.
•   This statement can raise errors during the execution of constructors for the class being instantiated by new-function,
    or for any class in its inherited class hierarchy. For example:
    •   A constructor in the class hierarchy executes the RETURN statement on page 889 with the ERROR option or the
        UNDO statement with the THROW or RETURN ERROR options.

       •   The class definition file for the class, a super class, or an interface could not be found.
       •   The run-time parameters of the constructor for the class, or a constructor for a class in the inherited class hierarchy,
           are not compatible.
       When the AVM encounters one of these errors, and the constructor cannot create the class instance or its inherited
       class hierarchy, the AVM automatically invokes the destructor for any class that has already been constructed while
       building the class hierarchy for the object.
       For more information on errors raised by instantiating classes, see Develop Object-oriented ABL Applications.
   •   The ABL Virtual Machine (AVM) automatically deletes (garbage collects) any class instance that you create with
       the NEW statement some time after no reference to that object exists in the ABL session. However, you can force
       any class instance to be deleted immediately by using the DELETE OBJECT statement. 


THIS-OBJECT statement
   A statement that invokes an overloaded constructor as the first statement in another overloaded constructor within the
   same defining class.

   Syntax

       THIS-OBJECT ( [ parameter [ , parameter ] ... ] )


   ( [ parameter [ , parameter ] ... ] )
                Specifies zero or more parameters passed to the specified overloaded constructor. You must match
                the parameters identified by the called constructor with respect to number, data type, and mode, and
                you must specify sufficient information for each parameter to disambiguate the specified constructor
                from all other constructors in the class. Otherwise, ABL raises an error identifying the ambiguity.
                For information on the parameter passing syntax and disambiguating overloaded constructors, see the
                Parameter passing syntax on page 783 reference entry.

   Note
   If you invoke an overloaded constructor in the defining class using THIS-OBJECT, if the constructor that you invoke
   does not, itself, invoke another overloaded constructor in the defining class, it must invoke a constructor in the immediate
   super class, either implicitly or explicitly using the SUPER statement.


THIS-OBJECT system reference
   An object reference to the currently running class instance that you can optionally use to access class members defined
   within the current class hierarchy.

   Syntax

       THIS-OBJECT [ : class-member-reference ]


   class-member-reference
               A reference to an instance variable data member, instance property, or instance method defined within
               the current class hierarchy. Any variable data member cannot be defined as an array (with an EXTENT).

   Example
   The following code fragment shows two instance methods defined within a class, where you must qualify a call to one
   of them with THIS-OBJECT because its name, Display, is an ABL reserved keyword:

       CLASS TestClass:

         METHOD VOID Display( ):

         END METHOD.

         METHOD VOID Foo( ):

            THIS-OBJECT:Display( ).

         END METHOD.

       END CLASS.



   Notes
   •   You can use THIS-OBJECT without a method call to pass an object reference to the currently running object instance
       as a parameter, or to return an object reference to itself as a method return value.
   •   Use of the THIS-OBJECT system reference to call instance methods that are available within the class hierarchy
       where they are defined is generally optional. However, you must use the THIS-OBJECT system reference to call
       any instance method whose name is identical to an ABL reserved keyword. The same is true if you are calling an
       event method on a class-defined or inherited instance event of a class whose name is identical to an ABL reserved
       keyword.

   •   Use of the THIS-OBJECT system reference to access instance variable data members or properties that are available
       within the class hierarchy where they are defined is optional. However, you must use the THIS-OBJECT system
       reference to access any such data member or property whose name is identical to an ABL reserved keyword. 
   •   You cannot use the THIS-OBJECT system reference to access a static class member.
   •   To invoke other constructors defined within the current class, use the THIS-OBJECT statement.


Type-name syntax
   Specifies the name of an ABL or .NET data type that you can specify as a single instance or as an array of such instances.
   Thus, an ABL data type can be a built-in primitive type or an array of such primitive types, or it can be a class-based
   built-in or user-defined object type (such as a class, enumeration, or interface type) or an ABL array of such object types.
   A .NET data type can only be a class-based object type (such as a class, structure, enumeration, or interface) or an ABL
   array of such object types. The EXTENT option, used to define an array of types, is thus counted as part of the array
   type name.

   Syntax

     { primitive-type-name | object-type-name } [ EXTENT [ constant ] ]
                                                                                                   
You use a different syntax when defining variables using the VAR statement on page 1041:

  primitive-type-name [ [ [ constant ] ] ] | [ CLASS ] object-type-name [ [ [
  constant ] ] ]


primitive-type-name
           An unquoted string that specifies the name of a built-in ABL primitive type. For information on the
           supported primitive types and their names, see the Data types on page 258 reference entry.
object-type-name
           Specifies an ABL or .NET object type using the following syntax:

              [ " ] ABL-object-type [ " ] |
              [ " ] dotNET-object-type [ " ]


[ " ] ABL-object-type [ " ]
           An ABL object type, where ABL-object-type consists of text elements with the following syntax:

              [    package-name . ] class-interface-or-enum-name


package-name
          A period-separated list of text components that, along with class-interface-or-enum-name, uniquely
          identify an ABL class, interface, or enum. These text components specify a package that is based on
          a valid directory pathname, relative to PROPATH, which identifies the location of the file that defines
          the class, interface, or enum. Thus, each text component of package-name maps to a directory level
          in the path, and each slash separator in the path corresponds to a period separating two components.
           If specified, the relative path of the class definition file represented by package-name must remain
           constant between compile time and run time. If the class definition file resides directly on PROPATH,
           the class or interface is not defined in a package and therefore has no package-name in its type name.
           With the presence of an appropriate USING statement you can also specify an ABL object
           type that is defined in a package using the class-interface-or-enum-name without its qualifying
           package-name. For more information, see the notes for this reference entry.
class-interface-or-enum-name
           The name of an ABL class, interface, or enumeration. This name must match the name of a class
           definition file (excluding the .cls or .r extension) located in the relative path represented by
           package-name, if specified. The name must begin with an alphabetic character and it cannot contain
           a period or a space.
           If the ABL-object-type has a package-name that contains embedded spaces, you must enclose the entire
           ABL-object-type in quotes ("). Otherwise, quotes are optional.
           Note: Do not place a class definition file in a directory whose name contains a period (.) character;
           ABL interprets the component after the period as another directory level and will therefore not find
           the referenced class definition file.
[ " ] dotNET-object-type [ " ]
           A .NET object type, where dotNET-object-type consists of text elements with the following syntax:

              [ namespace . ] dotNET-object-name                    [ + inner-name ]
                                                                                                    

namespace
            A period-separated list of text components that, along with dotNET-object-name, uniquely identify a
            .NET type. The components of namespace are defined according to .NET requirements. ABL does
            not support access to .NET types defined in the default namespace. In other words, you cannot access
            a .NET type that does not have a namespace defined for it.
            However, with the presence of an appropriate USING statement on page 1035, you can also specify a
            .NET object type using the dotNET-object-name without its qualifying namespace. 
dotNET-object-name
          The name of a .NET class (including a structure or enumeration), delegate, interface, or other object
          type referenced within the .NET namespace specified by namespace.
inner-name
          The name of a .NET nested (inner) type defined within the .NET type definition specified by
          namespace.dotNET-object-name. Thus, inner-name can represent the name of an:
            •   Inner class defined by the specified .NET class
            •   Inner enumeration defined by the specified .NET class
            •   Inner interface defined by the specified .NET interface
                        CAUTION: .NET languages normally separate the name of an inner type from the
                        defining type name using a period (.). You must replace this period with a plus sign
                        (+) to reference the inner type name in ABL.

                If the name part of the dotNET-object-type contains any embedded spaces or square brackets ([]),
                you must enclose the entire dotNET-object-type in quotes ("). Otherwise, quotes are optional.

           
EXTENT [ constant ]
            EXTENT indicates that it is an array of the specified type and constant is an integer value that specifies
            the number of elements in the array. Without constant, the array is an indeterminate array type.
            

Examples
If your PROPATH is "C:/myfiles", and your class definition file name is
"C:/myfiles/acme/myObjs/CustObjs.cls", then ABL requires package-name to be "acme.myObjs."
and class-or-interface-name to be "CustObjs".
The .NET Button class is in the System.Windows.Forms namespace. Therefore, you reference its qualified (complete)
type name like this:

  System.Windows.Forms.Button


The .NET ControlCollection class is an inner class of System.Windows.Forms.Control. Therefore, you
reference its qualified type name like this:

    System.Windows.Forms.Control+ControlCollection


The following code fragment defines object references to the .NET type, System.Drawing.Point, and to a
one-dimensional .NET array of System.Drawing.Point elements using DEFINE VARIABLE statements:

    DEFINE VARIABLE rPoint      AS CLASS System.Drawing.Point NO-UNDO.
    DEFINE VARIABLE rPointArray AS CLASS "System.Drawing.Point[]" NO-UNDO.


The following code fragment defines the same variables using VAR statements:

    VAR CLASS System.Drawing.Point rPoint.
    VAR CLASS "System.Drawing.Point[]" rPointArray.



Notes
•   Both elements of an ABL object type name (package-name and class-interface-or-enum-name) must conform to the
    case sensitivity requirements of the operating system (e.g., UNIX or Windows). On a case-sensitive OS, only the
    first reference to the object type name must be case correct. ABL follows this initial letter case for all subsequent
    references to the type.
•   You cannot specify Progress as the first component of package-name for any ABL user-defined class. For example,
    Progress.Inventory.UpdateInv is an invalid type name for a user-defined class and results in a compiler
    error.
•   You must use equivalent static type-name syntax to reference static members of a class whose names are identical
    to reserved keywords, as well as from inside the ABL class hierarchy, including when you call event methods on
    inherited static class events.
    •   ABL allows you to name an ABL class or interface using an ABL reserved keyword, such as Display or DISPLAY.
    For a list of ABL reserved keywords, see the Keyword Index. However, this is not a recommended coding practice,
    in part because ABL does not fully support the use of static type-name syntax for a class or interface name that is
    an ABL reserved keyword. This limitation is mitigated if the type name is a fully qualified type name that includes
    both the package-name and class name.
•   Depending on the type definition, the context of the type reference, and the presence of an appropriate USING
    statement, you can use a qualified or an unqualified class, interface, or enum name to reference an ABL
    object type. A qualified type name is one that includes both a package-name and a class-interface-or-enum-name.
    An unqualified type name is one that includes class-interface-or-enum-name alone, without a package-name. All
    qualified type names must be fully qualified, using a complete package-name. ABL does not support partially
    qualified type names using a partial package-name specification. Without an appropriate USING statement, you can
    only specify an unqualified type name when the type is defined directly on PROPATH (not in a package). In this
    case, the unqualified type name is the complete type name for the object type.
    Note: For classes with static members, Progress Software Corporation recommends that you either define the class
    in a package-name and always reference its static members using the fully qualified class type name, or use a naming
    convention that defines static members with unique names.
•   Depending on the presence of an appropriate USING statement on page 1035, you can use a qualified or unqualified
    type name to reference a .NET type. A qualified .NET type name is one that includes both a namespace and a
    dotNET-object-name. An unqualified .NET type name is one that includes dotNET-object-name alone, without its
    defined namespace. All qualified .NET type names must be fully qualified, using a complete namespace. ABL
    (unlike .NET languages) does not support partially qualified type names using a partial namespace specification.
    Without an appropriate USING statement, you cannot specify an unqualified .NET type name, because ABL does
    not support access to .NET types that are defined in the .NET default namespace.
•   You can reference a .NET delegate type only in the context of a DEFINE EVENT statement.
•   When you specify the type name of a class, interface, or enumeration in its ABL type definition statement (CLASS,
    INTERFACE, or ENUM statement), and the class file where the type is defined resides in a package directory, you
    must specify the qualified type name (package-name.class-interface-or-enum-name) for its definition, even with the
    presence of an appropriate USING statement. You can only specify an unqualified type name
    (class-interface-or-enum-name alone) in its type definition statement when the class file defining the type resides
    directly on PROPATH (is not in a package directory).
•   ABL allows a locally scoped name (for example, a variable, temp-table, buffer name) to be identical to the name of
    an accessible class. If this is the case, the locally scoped name takes precedence over any static type-name reference
    to the unqualified class type name, causing a compiler error on any such reference to a static class member. To avoid
    this error, ensure that no locally scoped names have the same name as the class, and always either use fully qualified
    type-name syntax to reference the static class member or use naming conventions to guarantee uniqueness for static
    member names.
•   Because of the similarity between the syntax of object-type-name references and table buffer and field references
    (including similarities between syntax type-name references and field attribute references), ABL can encounter
    ambiguous references among them, resulting in compilation errors. To ensure that ABL always recognizes
    object-type-name references unambiguously, either define all object type names with at least three period (.) separators
    (in other words, at least three components in any package-name specification) or use naming conventions to guarantee
    that object-type-name references and database element references are unique. Otherwise, ABL recognizes all such
    references as object-type-name references.
    For example, suppose that you have a user-defined class type in your PROPATH, Sports2020.Customer.Name,
    which defines a static property, Label. The reference in the following code fragment would then be ambiguous
    because ABL cannot distinguish between a reference to this static Label property and a reference to the LABEL
    attribute on the fill-in widget that is defined for the Name field in the Customer table of the Sports2020 database:

        DEFINE VARIABLE cLabel AS CHARACTER NO-UNDO.
        DEFINE FRAME a Sports2020.Customer.Name.

        FIND FIRST Sports2020.Customer.
        cLabel = Sports2020.Customer.Name:Label. /* Ambiguous reference */


    Note: The .NET class library does not list nested types as members (which they are) of the type that defines them.
    Instead, it lists each nested type definition immediately following the type that defines it. You can identify .NET
    nested types in this listing by the period (.) that separates the inner-name of the nested type name from the name of
    the .NET type that defines it. As shown in this syntax and examples, ABL uses a plus (+) instead of a period (.) to
    reference the inner-name of a nested type.
•   To compile ABL references to a .NET type, the type must be defined in either an automatically-loaded .NET assembly
    or in a .NET assembly that is listed in an OpenEdge assembly references file named assemblies.xml. This file
    must be available either in the working directory or in the directory specified by the Assemblies (-assemblies)
    startup parameter. You must also deploy this file at run time. For more information on working with assembly
    references files, see Use .NET Classes in ABL Applications.
•   OpenEdge loads the .NET Common Language Runtime (CLR) and all required assemblies for access by ABL if any
    of the following conditions exists:
    •   You use the Preload CLR (-preloadCLR) startup parameter to start the current ABL session, which causes
        the .NET CLR to load at session startup.

       •   The ABL compiler encounters a reference to a qualified object type name, and either that type name matches (or
           results from a match) to a USING statement containing the FROM ASSEMBLY option or the type cannot be
           found on PROPATH (meaning that ABL assumes it is a .NET type). This reference can occur on any ABL
           statement where a type name is used, such as a DEFINE VARIABLE, CAST, static method call, and so on.
           Note: An unqualified type name that does not resolve to a qualified type name from a USING statement match
           is assumed to be the name of an ABL user-defined type, which does not cause the CLR to load.
       •   At run time, the ABL Virtual Machine (AVM) executes a statement using the NEW function (classes) on page
           713 for a .NET object.
       •   At run time, the AVM accesses a static .NET method, property, or data member.
       •   At run time, the AVM accesses the FIRST-FORM attribute or LAST-FORM attribute, or accesses the
           ACTIVE-FORM system reference on page 62.
   •   When you first reference a .NET type in a procedure or class file (compilable unit), ABL is always case-sensitive
       when using your reference to identify and search for the type definition. However, for names of .NET class members,
       including properties, data members, methods, and enumeration members, ABL is case insensitive.
       Note: Microsoft recommends that .NET names never be distinguished by letter case, alone. However, if a .NET
       class does have two class members with names distinguished only by letter case, ABL finds only the first one defined
       in the class.
     •   When creating and accessing .NET arrays in ABL, you must use methods of the .NET System.Array type. ABL
       also supports automatic mappings between ABL and one-dimensional .NET arrays, allowing supported .NET and
       ABL arrays to be assigned to each other or passed to each other as routine parameters. 
   •   Note that you can specify an ABL array of .NET array objects, which is equivalent to a two-dimensional array. The
       following example defines an ABL array with 10 elements, each of which can reference a one-dimensional .NET
       array of System.Drawing.Point objects:

           DEFINE VARIABLE rPointArray AS CLASS "System.Drawing.Point[]"
             EXTENT 10 NO-UNDO.


   •   You can also specify a constructed .NET generic type for dotNET-object-name. ABL supports references to a .NET
       generic type for all uses of .NET types except to specify a .NET class to inherit or a .NET interface to implement in
       an ABL class definition. 


TYPE-OF function
   Verifies that the class instance to which the specified object reference points is an instance of the specified object type,
   inherits from the specified super class, or implements the specified interface. If the object reference is valid and points
   to an instance of the specified type, the function returns TRUE. Otherwise, it returns FALSE.

   Syntax

       TYPE-OF ( object-reference , object-type-name ).
                                                                                                        | ABL Syntax Reference | 1017



   object-reference
              An object reference to a class instance.
   object-type-name
              Specifies the type name of a class, a super class, or an interface that might be defined, inherited from,
              or implemented (respectively) by the object referenced by object-reference. If object-type-name
              specifies an interface that is inherited by an interface that the class instance implements, then the
              inherited interface is also implemented by the class instance specified by the object-type-name. Specify
              the object type name using the syntax described in the Type-name syntax on page 1011 reference entry.
              With an appropriate USING statement on page 1035, you can also specify an unqualified class or interface
              name alone.


USING statement
   Allows you to reference a single specified ABL or .NET object type, or reference all the types in an ABL package or
   .NET namespace, using their unqualified type names.

   Syntax

       USING
         { object-type-name | { package-name | namespace } .* }
         [ FROM { ASSEMBLY | PROPATH } ]


   object-type-name
               Specifies the qualified type name of a single ABL class or interface, or of a single .NET class, structure,
               interface, or enumeration. This type name must be the fully qualified type name (including the package
               or namespace) of an ABL or .NET class or interface type (as described in the Type-name syntax on
               page 1011 reference entry).
               Use this option to identify a single ABL class or interface defined in a package, or a single .NET class,
               structure, interface, or enumeration defined in a namespace, that you want to reference by its unqualified
               type name.
               The value of object-type-name is restricted to alphanumeric characters plus the symbols #, $, %, and
               _.
   { package-name | namespace } .*
               Specifies an ABL package-name that includes ABL classes or interfaces that you want to reference,
               or a .NET namespace that includes .NET classes (including structures and enumerations) or interfaces
               that you want to reference, where an unqualified class, interface, structure, or enumeration name can
               replace '*' to form a valid fully qualified type name.
               Use this option to identify all the ABL classes or interfaces defined in a package, or all the .NET
               classes, structures, interfaces, or enumerations defined in a namespace, for reference by their unqualified
               type names.
               This expression is restricted to alphanumeric characters plus the symbols #, $, %, and _.
   [ FROM { ASSEMBLY | PROPATH } ]
               Optionally identifies where to locate a given type definition whose type is being referenced using this
               statement. This identification permits the ABL compiler to focus its search for the type definition
               depending on whether the USING statement specifies an ABL package-based type or a .NET
  namespace-based type. When you specify the FROM ASSEMBLY option, ABL assumes that the type
            is a .NET type and uses the list of .NET assemblies defined in the assembly identification file to search
            for the type definition. When you specify the FROM PROPATH option, ABL assumes that the type
            is an ABL type and uses PROPATH to search for the type definition. If you do not specify a FROM
            option, the search for a type definition first uses PROPATH, then uses the specified list of .NET
            assemblies. In most cases, the use of an appropriate FROM option improves compile-time performance.
                    CAUTION: Avoid using ABL and .NET class types with the same name. This can
                    cause unpredictable behavior, regardless of whether you specify FROM PROPATH or
                    FROM ASSEMBLY.


Example
You can use either one of the following code fragments to reference the class Acme.BusObjs.Customer using its
unqualified or fully qualified class name:

    USING Acme.BusObjs.*.

    DEFINE VARIABLE CustObj AS CLASS Customer.
    DEFINE VARIABLE CustObj2 AS CLASS Acme.BusObjs.Customer.



    USING Acme.BusObjs.Customer.

    DEFINE VARIABLE CustObj AS CLASS Customer.
    DEFINE VARIABLE CustObj2 AS CLASS Acme.BusObjs.Customer.


The ControlCollection class is an inner class of the .NET class System.Windows.Forms.Control.
Therefore, you can reference these class types by their unqualified type names like this:

    USING System.Windows.Forms.* FROM ASSEMBLY.

    DEFINE VARIABLE rControl    AS CLASS Control.
    DEFINE VARIABLE rCollection AS CLASS Control+ControlCollection.



Notes
•   When a type name is referenced at compile time, ABL uses the specified USING statements to help validate that the
    type exists in a specified package or loaded assembly.
•   This statement must appear before any other compilable statement (except other USING statements or the
    ROUTINE-LEVEL ON ERROR UNDO, THROW statement) in a procedure (.p or .w) or class definition
    (.cls) file. The scope of the statement is the file in which it appears.
•   This statement has no effect on the object-type-name that defines the name of a user-defined type in a CLASS or
    INTERFACE statement. In a CLASS or INTERFACE statement, you must always specify the user-defined type that
    it defines using the fully qualified object-type-name.
•   For both ABL and .NET object types, you can only reference class names for classes, interface names for interfaces
    (and so on) that are defined in the specified ABL package or .NET namespace. For example, you cannot reference
    partially qualified class names for classes in packages that are further defined under the specified package. To
    reference the class names of classes in other packages, even those that appear to be subpackages, you must specify
    an additional USING statement for each package. For example, given the following class file:

      C:\Classes\Inventory\Shipping.cls
                                                                                                      


    If you specify the USING statement in this code fragment, the class references in the following statements are invalid:

      USING Classes.*.

      DEFINE VARIABLE clRef AS Inventory.Shipping. /* Invalid */
      clRef = NEW Inventory.Shipping().            /* Invalid */


    The following code fragment is correct:

      USING Classes.Inventory.*.

      DEFINE VARIABLE clRef AS Shipping.
      clRef = NEW Shipping().


•   You can also reference the fully qualified type names of any object types identified by this statement. You must
    sometimes do this to avoid ambiguous class or interface name references.
•   When you reference a constructed .NET or ABL generic type name with the presence of appropriate USING
    statements, you can also specify the type parameters in its name, as well as the generic type name, itself, using
    unqualified type name references. This also works to resolve unqualified type-name references to the type parameters
    specified in the generic object-type-name of successive USING statements. In addition, ABL resolves unqualified
    type-name references to all the constructed generic types that can be defined for a given namespace specified in a
    USING statement. For example:

      /* 1 */ USING System.Windows.Forms.*.

      /* Button is resolved by the first USING statement */
      /* 2 */ USING System.Collections.Generic.List<Button>.

      /* 3 */ USING System.Collections.ObjectModel.*.

      /* List and Button are resolved by the first two USING statements */
      DEFINE VARIABLE ButtonList AS CLASS List<Button> NO-UNDO.

      /* Collection<INTEGER> is resolved by the third USING statement */
      DEFINE VARIABLE intColl AS CLASS Collection<INTEGER> NO-UNDO.

      /* However, this line does not compile */
      DEFINE VARIABLE stringList AS CLASS List<CHARACTER> NO-UNDO.


    Note that unlike the previous DEFINE statement, the final DEFINE statement does not compile, because there is no
    USING statement specified to resolve references to all possible constructions of the defined open generic type, in
    this case, System.Collections.Generic.List<T>. Also in this example, Button is a class in the
    System.Windows.Forms namespace and Collection<T> is a generic class in the
    System.Collections.ObjectModel namespace. 
•   ABL does not validate the definition of type names, packages, or namespaces during USING statement compilation.
    When ABL later encounters an unqualified object type name following the compilation of all USING statements, it
    validates this type name against each available object-type-name, package-name, and namespace specified by these
    USING statements to identify and verify the type definition.
•   During procedure or class definition file compilation, ABL resolves all unqualified type name references according
    to the following algorithm:
                                                                                                       
      1. ABL examines the USING statements in order and, for each statement that specifies a object-type-name, compares
         the unqualified name with the last node of the object-type-name. If the names are equal, ABL considers this a
         match and continues compilation with the current USING statement according to its specified FROM option:
            •   If FROM ASSEMBLY is specified, ABL searches for object-type-name in the loaded assemblies.
            •   If FROM PROPATH is specified, ABL checks if object-type-name specifies a built-in class or interface type,
                and if not, ABL searches for a corresponding class file according to the object-type-name package relative
                to PROPATH.
            •   If no FROM option is specified, ABL checks if object-type-name specifies built-in class or interface type,
                and if not, ABL first searches for a corresponding class file according to the object-type-name package relative
                to PROPATH, then searches for object-type-name in the loaded assemblies.
      2. If ABL has not matched the unqualified type name with a object-type-name specified in a USING statement,
         ABL again examines the USING statements in order. For each USING statement that contains a package-name.*
         or namespace.*, ABL replaces the "*" with the unqualified name, creating a object-type-name. ABL then
         continues compilation with the current USING statement according to its FROM option:
            •   If FROM ASSEMBLY is specified, ABL searches for object-type-name in the loaded assemblies.
            •   If FROM PROPATH is specified, ABL checks if object-type-name specifies a built-in class or interface type,
                and if not, ABL searches for a corresponding class file according to the object-type-name package relative
                to PROPATH.
            •   If no FROM option is specified, ABL checks if object-type-name specifies built-in class or interface type,
                and if not, ABL first searches for a corresponding class file according to the object-type-name package relative
                to PROPATH, then searches for object-type-name in the loaded assemblies.
      3. If ABL does not identify a qualified type name from any object-type-name derived from a USING statement, it
         searches for the unqualified type name reference as a complete ABL type name (defined without a package-name).
         Thus, ABL searches for an ABL class file with a filename equal to the unqualified type name directly on
         PROPATH.
      If none of these searches identify a valid type definition, ABL generates a compiler error that the type cannot be
      found.


VALID-OBJECT function
   Verifies that an object reference points to a valid ABL or .NET class-based object instance or an ABL handle-based
   object. If the object reference represents an object that is currently valid, the function returns TRUE. If the object reference
   is no longer valid (for example, it was garbage collected or explicitly deleted), the function returns FALSE.

   Syntax

       VALID-OBJECT ( { handle|object-reference } )


   handle
               A handle to an ABL handle-based object. The handle argument must be a variable of type HANDLE
               and must contain a valid handle. When used with a handle-based object, VALID-OBJECT works in
               the same way as the VALID-HANDLE function.
   object-reference
               An object reference defined for an ABL or .NET object type.	