: Punctuation
   The colon (:) symbol ends block labels and block header statements like DO, FOR, and REPEAT. It also serves as a
   separator between:
   •   A handle reference and an attribute or method, for example ttCust:PRIVATE-DATA or ttCust:CLEAR( ),
       where ttCust is a handle to a temp-table
   •   An object or static type-name reference and a class-based property, method, or event, for example,
       rObj:ToString( ), rObj:NEXT-SIBLING, or Progress.Lang.Class:GetClass(
       "Progress.Data.BindingSource" ), where rObj is an object reference to a Progress.Lang.Object
       instance
   •   A character string literal and one of its options, for example, "City/State/Zip":U
   It also follows the EDITING keyword in an EDITING phrase and is a device delimiter in Windows.
   

:: Punctuation
   The double colon (::) is a short-hand syntax for referencing constant named members of database object containers, for
   example dynamic ProDataSets, queries, temp-tables, and buffers.
   The following rules will help you to decide whether to use dot, colon, or double colon syntax:
   •   Use a dot between two names when the left-hand side name is the actual name of a database or table, known at
       compile time, and is not a handle or reference of any kind. For example, Customer.CustNum or
       Sports2020.Customer or Sports2020.Customer.CustNum.
   •   Use a colon between two character strings when the left-hand side is a handle or reference, and is not the actual name
       of a database or table, and the right-hand side is an attribute or method for the left-hand-side handle or reference.
       For example, hBuff:NUM-FIELDS, or hDset:NUM-BUFFERS or hBuff:FIND-FIRST.
   •   Use a double colon between two character strings when the left-hand side name is a handle to a container object of
       some kind (buffer, table or ProDataSet) and the right-hand side is not an attribute or method, but instead is a named
       member of the left-hand side. For example, hBuff::CustNum or hDset::Customer or
       hDSet::Customer::CustNum.
   For example, if hBuff is a HANDLE to the Customer table, then hBuff:NAME returns the string "Customer", but
   hBuff::NAME returns the value of the NAME field for the current record in the hBuff Buffer, e.g. "Lift Line
   Skiing".


. Punctuation
   The period (.) symbol ends all statements, including block header statements. The DO, FOR, and REPEAT statements
   can end with a period or a colon.
   It is also serves as a separator between:
   •   A filename and a filename extension (suffix) in most operating system platforms, for example, Letter.txt
   •   The elements of a qualified database table or buffer field name, for example, Customer.CustNum or
       Sports2020.Customer or Sports2020.Customer.CustNum
   •   The elements of an ABL package name or .NET namespace, for example, Progress.Lang, Progress.Windows,
       or System.Collections
   •   An ABL package or .NET namespace and the name of a class or interface defined in that package or namespace, for
       example, Progress.Lang.Error, Progress.Windows.Form, or System.Collections.SortedList
 

; Punctuation
   The ANSI SQL (-Q) startup parameter allows you to redefine the semicolon as a terminator. This startup parameter
   enforces strict ANSI SQL conformance and allows you to terminate SQL statements with a semicolon. The ANSI SQL
   (-Q) parameter allows OpenEdge to run standard SQL statements and scripts built with other products.
   The ANSI SQL (-Q) parameter disables the use of the semicolon within UNIX escapes.

       UNIX SMBL=foo; export SMBL

   As a general rule, use the period (.) as a terminator for ABL statements even when you specify the ANSI SQL (-Q)
   parameter for an ABL session.



, Punctuation
   The comma (,) symbol separates multiple file specifications (used in FOR statements, FOR phrases of DO and REPEAT
   statements, and PRESELECT phrases), branching statements (used in UNDO statements and phrases), and multiple
   arguments of a function.



; Special character
   This special character is supported only for backward compatibility.
   The semicolon (;), when combined with a second character in the Procedure Editor, provides alternative representations
   of special characters as follows:

    Special character                      Alternative representation                    
    @						;&
    [						;<
    ]						;>
    ^						;*
    '						;'
    {						;(
    |						;%
    }						;)
    ~						;?

   To suppress the semicolon's interpretation as a special character, precede it with a tilde (~). For example, to enter the
   string ;< in the Procedure Editor and not have ABL interpret it as an open bracket, type ~;<.
   Additionally, if an ASCII character is mapped to an extended alphabetical character by an IN statement in the
   PROTERMCAP file, you can enter the extended character in the Procedure Editor by preceding the ASCII character
   with a semicolon. For example, if [ is mapped to Ä, ABL interprets the ;[ sequence as Ä.
                                                                                                              

? Special character
   The question mark is a special character that represents the Unknown value. ABL treats a quoted question mark ("?")
   in a procedure or an input field as a question mark character. It treats an unquoted question mark (?) in a procedure or
   an input field as an unknown value.
   The following table indicates the results when using the Unknown value (?) in a comparison expression (EQ, GE, GT,
   LE, LT, NE). These results are true for both character and integer variables.
   Table 1: Using the Unknown value (?) in comparison operations

    Comparison operator                      One argument is ?                     Both arguments are ?
    EQ or =                                  F                                     T
    GE or >=                                 ?                                     T
    GT or >                                  ?                                     F
    LE or <=                                 ?                                     T
    LT or <                                  ?                                     F
    NE or <>                                 T                                     F


   Note: WebSpeed treats an unquoted question mark (?) in an HTML input field as a character.
   Additional points about the Unknown value (?) are:
   •   Any number of Unknown value (?) records can be in a unique index. This is useful in cases where you want to defer
       choosing key values for a unique index.
   •   If you define a field as mandatory in the Dictionary, that field cannot contain the Unknown value (?) when the AVM
       writes the record to the database.
   •   For sorting and indexing purposes, the Unknown value (?) sorts high. This means that fields with the Unknown
       value (?) are sorted after all other values, so when you display all records of a table, the records with the Unknown
       value (?) in the field(s) used for ordering the record appear last. However, if the query does a range match on that
       field, the rules in Table 1 still apply. That is, a query with a WHERE clause with "field < ?" does not return any
       records due to the rules described in Table 1. That also impacts a query with the INDEXED-REPOSITION option
       and a range match where the runtime needs to validate that the record is part of the query's result-set. For that reason,
       it is recommended that the WHERE phrase of such queries use the EQ or NE operator with the Unknown value (?) to
       define if they should be included or not, if that field could have the Unknown value (?).
   •   The question mark (?) character in the first position of a field equals the Unknown value (?), not a question mark.
   •   When using the Unknown value (?) in a comparison expression for SQL, the result is unknown.
   •   When using the Unknown value (?) in an expression, the result of that expression is usually unknown. For example,
       when you concatenate first, middle, and last names, and the middle name is ?, then the result is ?.
   

?: Safe navigation operator
   The question mark-colon (?:) is a symbol for the Safe Navigation Operator. It supports the conditional execution of a
   chain of object-oriented ABL cascading element references. The ? in the symbol indicates conditional execution. The
   Safe Navigation Operator provides the ability to write crisp, object-oriented ABL code that is the equivalent of an
   elaborate IF ...THEN...ELSE block.

   Syntax

       {object-reference}?:{class-member-name}.


   Object-reference
              Reference to an instance of an ABL class that defines the specific data member as an instance member
              (non-static).
   class-member-name
             The name of a data member or member method you want to access. A class member is an element
             that is defined in and at the level of a class definition.
   The following rules apply when using the safe navigation operator:
   •     White space is not permitted between the question mark and the colon punctuation of the Safe Navigation Operator
         (?:). If present, the AVM terminates the compilation and throws a syntax error.
   •     The Safe Navigation Operator cannot be used on the left-hand side of an assignment expression.
   •     The Safe Navigation Operator can only be used with object-oriented ABL objects. It is not available for use with
         non object-oriented ABL built-in widgets.
   •     Upon finding the Safe Navigation Operator, the AVM tests if the object on the left-hand side of the operator is valid
         before de-referencing the object on the right-hand side of the operator. If the object on the left-hand side of the
         operator is invalid, the AVM stops further de-referencing of chained methods and returns the Unknown (?) value.
   •     The Safe Navigation Operator performs a short-circuit evaluation of chained elements. It stops the execution of the
         chain as soon as it discovers an invalid object reference and returns the Unknown (?) value.
   •     To check if the expression is executed successfully use the following expression:

         If return-value is ? then do <something>.



\ Special character
   The backslash (\) is an escape character on UNIX platforms only. It is a directory path separator in Windows platforms
   only.



~ Special character
   The tilde (~) is an escape character that causes the AVM to read the following character literally. A tilde followed by
   three octal digits represents a single character. Use it as a lead-in to enter the special characters shown in the following
   table. In a procedure, a tilde followed by something other than the items in the following table is ignored. For example,
   "~abc" is treated as "abc". (This may not work as expected when passing parameters to an include file.) The items
   in the following table are case sensitive.
   Table 2: Entering special characters in the Procedure Editor

    Sequence                 Interpreted as                Comment
    ~"                       "                             Use within quoted strings as an alternative to two quotes ("").
    ~'                       '                             Use within quoted strings as an alternative to two apostrophes ('').
    ~~                       ~                             –                                                                                                            ~\                     \                               –
    ~{                     {                               –
    ~nnn                   A single character              Where nnn is an octal value between 000 and 377. All three digits
                                                           are required. Do not use this to represent non-ASCII characters if
                                                           you are using different codepages for compiling and runtime, or
                                                           have different codepages between different runtime clients. Instead
                                                           use the ~u or ~U sequences.
    ~t                     Tab character                   Octal 011
    ~r                     Carriage return                 Octal 015
    ~n                     New line / Line feed            Octal 012
    ~E                     Escape                          Octal 033
    ~b                     Backspace                       Octal 010
    ~f                     Form feed                       Octal 014
    ~unnnn                 A single character              Where nnnn is a hexadecimal value representing a Unicode
                                                           character in the Basic Multilingual Plane. All four digits are
                                                           required.
    ~Unnnnnn               A single character              Where nnnnnn is a hexadecimal value representing a Unicode
                                                           character beyond the Basic Multilingual Plane. All six digits are
                                                           required.


" Special character
   The double quote (") encloses character constants or strings. To use quotes within a quoted character string, you must
   use two double quotes (""), which compile to a single double quote ("), or you must put a tilde (~) in front of any quotes
   within the quoted character string. (This does not work when passing parameters to an include file.)

 

' Special character
   The function of the single quote (') is the same as the double quote. But, if you use single and double quotes in a statement,
   the compiler checks the outermost quotes first, giving them precedence over the innermost quotes. For example, DISPLAY
   '"test"' shows up as "test", (ABL reads the double quotes literally), and DISPLAY "'test2'" shows up as
   'test2'.

   

/ Special character
   The slash (/) symbol is a directory path separator (UNIX). It is also used for date fields (99/99/99).



( ) Expression precedence
   Parentheses raise expression precedence. Also, some functions require you to enclose arguments in parentheses.

  

[ ] Array reference
   Square brackets ([ ]) enclose array subscripts ([1], [2], etc.), initial values (such as [1,2,3,4]), or ranges (such
   as, [1 FOR 4]). The following sections describe these uses in more detail.
   
   Array subscripts
   In ABL, the first element of the array has an index value of 1. The following example shows how to reference array
   elements using a subscript:

     VAR INT[4] myArray = [10,11,12,13].
     MESSAGE myArray[1] myArray[2].


   Initial values
   The notation [n,n,n...] is only allowed for the INITIAL value in a DEFINE VARIABLE statement on page 412
   or during the initialization of the variable in the VAR statement on page 1041, as shown in the following example:

     DEFINE VARIABLE myArray AS INTEGER EXTENT 4 NO-UNDO INITIAL [10,11,12,13].
     VAR INT[3] myArray2 = [20,21,22].

   If you need to assign the elements in the array outside of those two statements, you have to do it one at a time, if the
   values are different. For example:

     myArray[1] = 1.
     myArray[2] = 2.

   However, if the value is the same for all elements, you can just assign the one value to the array:

     myArray = 1.


   Ranges
   The range notation [n FOR m] causes ABL to start with the nth array element and to work with that and the next m
   elements. In a range, you can use a variable for the first element, but the second element must be a constant. The range 
   notation can be used in a statement where array elements are expanded automatically, such as DISPLAY, UPDATE,
    SET, EXPORT, and IMPORT. The following example shows how to use a range in a DISPLAY statement:

      DEFINE VARIABLE myArray AS INTEGER EXTENT 4 NO-UNDO INITIAL [10,11,12,13].

      DISPLAY myArray[1 FOR 4].

    In the example, the DISPLAY statement expands to DISPLAY myArray[1] myArray[2] myArray[3]
    myArray[4].

  

= Special character
    • Returns a TRUE value if two expressions are equal.

   Syntax

       expression { EQ | = } expression


   expression
                A constant, field name, variable name, or expression. The expressions on either side of the EQ or =
                must be of the same data type, although one might be an integer and the other a decimal.

   Example
   This procedure prompts for the initials of a sales rep. The FOR EACH block reads all the order records for that sales
   rep. The DISPLAY statement displays information from each of the retrieved records.
   r-eq.p

       PROMPT-FOR Order.SalesRep WITH SIDE-LABELS CENTERED.

       FOR EACH Order NO-LOCK WHERE Order.SalesRep EQ INPUT Order.SalesRep:
         DISPLAY Order.OrderNum Order.CustNum Order.OrderDate Order.PromiseDate
            Order.ShipDate
            WITH CENTERED.
       END.



   Notes
   •   By default, the AVM uses the collation rules you specify to compare characters and sort records. The collation rules
       specified with the Collation Table (-cpcoll) startup parameter take precedence over a collation specified for any
       database the AVM accesses during the session, except when the AVM uses or modifies pre-existing indexes. If you
       do not specify a collation with the -cpcoll startup parameter, the AVM uses the language collation rules defined
       for the first database on the command line. If you do not specify a database on the command line, the AVM uses the
       collation rules with the default name "basic" (which might or might not exist in the convmap.cp file).
   •   You can compare character strings with EQ. Most character comparisons are case insensitive in ABL. That is,
       upper-case and lower-case characters have the same sort value. However, it is possible to define fields and variables
       as case sensitive (although it is not advised, unless strict ANSI SQL adherence is required). If either expression is a
       field or variable defined as case sensitive, the comparison is case sensitive and "Smith" does not equal "smith".
   •   Characters are converted to their sort code values for comparison. Using the default case-sensitive collation table,
       all uppercase letters sort before all lowercase letters (for example, a is greater than Z, but less than b.) Note also that
       in character code uppercase A is less than [ , \ , ^ , _, and ' , but lowercase a is greater than these.
   •   If one of the expressions has an Unknown value (?) and the other does not, the result is FALSE. If both have the
       Unknown value (?), the result is TRUE. However, for SQL, if the value of either or both expressions is the Unknown
       value (?), then the result is the Unknown value (?).
   •   The equal comparison ignores trailing blanks. Thus, "abc" is equal to "abc ". However, leading and embedded blanks
       are treated as characters and " abc" is not equal to "abc".
   •   You cannot compare data of different DATE, DATETIME, and DATETIME-TZ data types to each other using EQ.
       You must first convert different date and datetime data types to the same data type before doing a comparison between
       them.
   •   You can use EQ to compare one BLOB field to another. The AVM performs a byte-by-byte comparison.
   •   You can use EQ to compare a LONGCHAR variable to another LONGCHAR or CHARACTER variable. The
       variable values are converted to -cpinternal for comparison and must convert without error, or the AVM raises
       a run-time error.
   •   You can use EQ to compare a CLOB field to another CLOB field.
   •   You can use EQ to compare two enums, including both ABL and .NET enums, as long as they are the same enum
       type. EQ compares the underlying numerical values of the enumerators.


•Assigns the value of an expression to a database field or variable.

      Syntax

       field = expression [ NO-ERROR ]


   field
             The name of an ABL data element to which you want to assign the value of expression and that is
             defined with a data type that is compatible with the data type of expression. This data element can
             include a:
             •   Database or temp-table field
             •   Variable scoped to the current procedure, user-defined function, or method of a class or an accessible
                 class-based variable data member, including a subscripted or unsubscripted array variable
             •   Parameter defined for the current procedure, user-defined function, or method of a class, including
                 a subscripted or unsubscripted array parameter
             •   Writable class-based or COM property, including a subscripted or unsubscripted array property
             •   Writable handle attribute (such as PRIVATE-DATA)
             •   Writable system handle (such as CURRENT-WINDOW)
             •   ABL syntax that specifies a keyword-driven assignment statement (such as the PROPATH statement,
                 SUBSTRING statement, or similar statement)
expression
             An expression with a data type that is consistent with the data type of field. For more information, see
             the Expression on page 510 reference entry.
NO-ERROR
             The NO-ERROR option on page 726 is used to prevent the statement from raising ERROR and displaying
             error messages.
             For the assignment (=) statement with NO-ERROR, if ERROR is raised, then the left side of the
             assignment will be unchanged.
Note: You can use compound assignment operators (+=, -=, *=, /=) to perform an operation and an assignment, using
a shorthand notation. Supported operations include addition (numeric and date-based) and concatenation, subtraction
(numeric and date-based), multiplication, and division. For more information, see += Addition assignment operator on
page 46, -= Subtraction assignment operator on page 52, *= Multiplication assignment operator on page 54, and /=
Division assignment operator on page 57.

Example
This procedure resets all the monthly quota values to 2500 in all salesrep records. If you want to set values for individual
array elements, you can do so by making an explicit assignment using the assignment statement (=) and a specific array
reference, such as month-quota[1] or month-quota[i].
r-asgmnt.p

    DEFINE VARIABLE ctr AS INTEGER NO-UNDO.

    FOR EACH SalesRep:
      DO ctr = 1 TO 12:
         SalesRep.MonthQuota[ctr] = 2500.
      END.
    END.



Notes
•   If field expression is a decimal, the AVM rounds the value of the expression before assigning it. If field is a decimal
    and expression is a decimal, the AVM rounds the value of the expression to the number of decimal places defined
    for the field in the Data Dictionary, or defined or implied for a variable or temp-table field.
•   If field is an ABL array type and expression is not an array, and you do not identify a particular array element, the
    AVM stores is an integer and expression in each element of the array. If you identify a particular element, the AVM
    stores expression in the specified array element.
•   If both field and expression are ABL array types, the AVM copies the data for all expression array elements into the
    corresponding elements of the field array. This is known as a deep copy. For more information, see Work with
    one-dimensional arrays in Basic ABL.
•   ABL allows you to assign ABL arrays and .NET array objects to each other. How an array assignment works between
    ABL and .NET arrays depends upon the array type of field (the target of the assignment) and the array type of
    expression (the source for the assignment). For more information, see the Data types on page 258 reference entry.
•   If an assignment of one array to another encounters an error after some, but not all of the source array's elements are
    retrieved, none of the target's elements are updated.
•   If expression is an ABL handle-based object (for example, a temp-table, ProDataSet, widget, or socket), field must
    be a temp-table field, variable, or other ABL data element defined as a compatible handle. In this case, the AVM
    assigns only the handle of the ABL handle-based object to field, not the entire object and its contents.
•   If you assign a value to a database field, any ASSIGN trigger associated with that field executes at the end of the
    assignment statement (after any index changes are made). If the trigger raises ERROR, the assignment fails and the
    database changes are undone.
    Note: If the value to be assigned is the same as the value already in the database field, then any associated database
    ASSIGN triggers are not executed.
•   You can embed an assignment in a SET or UPDATE statement.
•   For multiple assignments, use the ASSIGN statement. This is more efficient than multiple assignment statements.
•   If field is a handle, the expression on the right-hand-side must also evaluate to a handle value that is specified using
    an appropriate reference to a handle-based object handle. For more information on object handle references, see the
    Handle Attributes and Methods Reference.
•   You can assign DATE, DATETIME, and DATETIME-TZ data. When the data type expression on the left side of the
    assignment statement contains more information than the data type expression on the right side provides (for example,
    datetime-tz = date where a DATETIME-TZ value contains more information than a DATE value), the time value
    defaults to midnight and the time zone is calculated using SESSION:TIMEZONE when that attribute is in use. If
    the attribute is not in use, the value defaults to the session's timezone. When the data type expression on the left side
    of the assignment statement contains less information than the data type expression on the right side provides (for
    example, date = datetime-tz where a DATE value contains less information than a DATETIME-TZ value), the AVM
    converts the DATETIME-TZ value to the local date and time of the session, then drops the time and time zone.
•   You can assign RAW values to MEMPTR variables and MEMPTR values to RAW variables. If the target variable
    is a RAW data type, the AVM re-sizes the target variable, if necessary, so that after the assignment is the same size
    as the source. Note that after the assignment (whether RAW = MEMPTR or MEMPTR = RAW), the target variable
    has a copy of the memory associated with the source—each variable has an independent copy of the data.
•   You can assign large object data from one BLOB or MEMPTR to another, and from one CLOB, LONGCHAR, or
    CHARACTER to another. You cannot assign large object data between BLOBs and CLOBs or MEMPTRs and
    LONGCHARs. You can accomplish this, indirectly, by using the COPY-LOB statement. For more information, see
    the COPY-LOB statement on page 208 reference entry.
    Note: When assigning BLOB or CLOB fields, the field must appear by itself on either the right-hand or the left-hand
    side of the assignment.
    The following table lists the default character conversions that the AVM performs when assigning CLOB,
    LONGCHAR, and CHARACTER data between a source and target object. References to CLOBCP and CLOBDB
    represent CLOB data in either the CLOB's defined code page or the database's defined code page, respectively.
    References to the "fixed code page" represent the code page of a target LONGCHAR variable set using the
    FIX-CODEPAGE statement.
    Table 8: Default assignment character conversions

    When the target object       And the source object       The AVM converts the data in the source object to . . .
    (on the left) is a . . .     (on the right) is a . . .
    LONGCHAR                     CLOBDB                      -cpinternal or the fixed code page
    LONGCHAR                     CLOBCP                      The CLOB's defined code page or the fixed code page
       LONGCHAR                     CHARACTER                   -cpinternal or the fixed code page
       LONGCHAR                     LONGCHAR                    The source LONGCHAR’s code page or the target’s fixed
                                                                code page
       CLOBDB                       CHARACTER                   The database's defined code page
       CLOBDB                       LONGCHAR                    The database's defined code page
       CLOBCP                       CHARACTER                   The CLOB's defined code page
       CLOBCP                       LONGCHAR                    The CLOB's defined code page
       CHARACTER                    CLOBDB                      -cpinternal code page
       CHARACTER                    CLOBCP                      -cpinternal code page
       CHARACTER                    LONGCHAR                    -cpinternal code page

   •   When you assign the Unknown value (?) to a BLOB or CLOB field, the AVM deletes any associated object data.
   •   If expression is a solitary invocation of the NEW function (classes) on page 713, this statement represents and conforms
       to the rules specified for the NEW statement on page 717.
   •   If expression evaluates to an object reference value, field must also be a data element defined as a class or interface
       type that is type-compatible with expression according to the rules for assigning references to class instances defined
       for the NEW statement. For more information, see the NEW statement on page 717 reference entry. Thus, you can
       assign one object reference variable to another object reference variable when the destination object reference (on
       the left side of the assignment) is defined for the same class, a super class, or an interface of the object reference
       being assigned (on the right side of the assignment). The destination object reference retains its defined class or
       interface type for compilation. However, following its assignment, at run time, the destination represents the subclass
       of field (or the class that implements the interface specified by field) that is defined by expression.
       If field has a class type that is a subclass lower in the class hierarchy than the class type represented by expression,
       you can cast expression to the type of field using the CAST function, but only if expression is a super class that
       actually contains an instance of the field class type. If field has a class type that implements an interface type
       represented by expression, you can similarly cast expression using the CAST function, but only if expression actually
       contains an instance of the field class type. For more information about the CAST function, see the CAST function
       on page 111 reference entry.
       After the assignment, field contains a copy of the object reference value returned by expression, which points to the
       same object instance, not a copy of the object referenced by expression.
   •   Although you can assign an object reference to a temp-table field defined as a Progress.Lang.Object class type, you
       cannot assign an object reference to a field in a database table. For more information, see Develop Object-oriented
       ABL Applications.



< Special character
    Returns a TRUE value if the first of two expressions is less than the second.

   Syntax

       expression { LT | < } expression


   expression
                A constant, field or variable name, or expression. The expressions on either side of the LT or < = must
                be the same data type, although one can be an integer and the other decimal.
                                                                                                             
   Example
   This procedure displays information for those Item records whose OnHand value is less than the Allocated value:
   r-lt.p

       FOR EACH Item NO-LOCK WHERE Item.OnHand < Item.Allocated:
         DISPLAY Item.ItemNum Item.ItemName Item.OnHand Item.Allocated.
       END.



   Notes
   •   By default, the AVM uses the collation rules you specify to compare characters and sort records. The collation rules
       specified with the Collation Table (-cpcoll) startup parameter take precedence over a collation specified for any
       database the AVM accesses during the session, except when the AVM uses or modifies pre-existing indexes. If you
       do not specify a collation with the -cpcoll startup parameter, the AVM uses the language collation rules defined
       for the first database on the command line. If you do not specify a database on the command line, the AVM uses the
       collation rules with the default name "basic" (which might or might not exist in the convmap.cp file).
   •   If either of the expressions is the Unknown value (?), then the result is the Unknown value (?); if both of the
       expressions are the Unknown value (?), then the result is FALSE. For more information on the Unknown value (?),
       see ? Special character on page 18.
   •   You can compare character strings with LT. Most such comparisons are case insensitive in ABL. That is, upper-case
       and lower-case characters have the same sort value. It is possible to define fields and variables as case sensitive
       (although it is not advised, unless strict ANSI SQL adherence is required). If either expression is a field or variable
       defined as case sensitive, the comparison is case sensitive and "Smith" does not equal "smith."
   •   Characters are converted to their sort code values for comparison. Using the default case-sensitive collation table,
       all uppercase letters sort before all lowercase letters (for example, a is greater than Z, but less than b.) Note also that
       in character code uppercase A is less than [ , \ , ^ , _, and ' , but lowercase a is greater than these.
   •   You cannot compare data of different DATE, DATETIME, and DATETIME-TZ data types to each other using LT.
       You must first convert different date and datetime data types to the same data type before doing a comparison between
       them.
   •   You can use LT to compare a LONGCHAR variable to another LONGCHAR or CHARACTER variable. The
       variable values are converted to -cpinternal for comparison and must convert without error, or the AVM raises
       a run-time error.
   •   You cannot use LT to compare one CLOB field to another.
   •   You can use LT to compare two enums, including both ABL and .NET enums, as long as they are the same enum
       type. LT compares the underlying numerical values of the enumerators.



< = Special character
    Returns a TRUE value if the first of two expressions is less than or equal to the second.

   Syntax

     expression { LE | <= } expression


   expression
                A constant, field name, variable name, or expression. The expressions on either side of the LE or < =
                must be of the same data type, although one can be integer and the other decimal.

   Example
   This procedure lists all the items with zero or negative on-hand quantities:
   r-le.p

     FOR EACH Item WHERE Item.OnHand <= 0:
       DISPLAY Item.ItemNnum Item.ItemName Item.OnHand.
     END.
   Notes
   •   By default, the AVM uses the collation rules you specify to compare characters and sort records. The collation rules
       specified with the Collation Table (-cpcoll) startup parameter take precedence over a collation specified for any
       database the AVM accesses during the session, except when the AVM uses or modifies pre-existing indexes. If you
       do not specify a collation with the -cpcoll startup parameter, the AVM uses the language collation rules defined
       for the first database on the command line. If you do not specify a database on the command line, the AVM uses the
       collation rules with the default name "basic" (which might or might not exist in the convmap.cp file).
   •   If either of the expressions is the Unknown value (?), then the result is the Unknown value (?); if both of the
       expressions are the Unknown value (?), then the result is TRUE. For more information on the Unknown value (?),
       see ? Special character on page 18.
   •   You can compare character strings with LE. Most character comparisons are case insensitive in ABL. That is,
       upper-case and lower-case characters have the same sort value. However, it is possible to define fields and variables
       as case sensitive (although it is not advised, unless strict ANSI SQL adherence is required). If either expression is a
       field or variable defined as case sensitive, the comparison is case sensitive and "Smith" does not equal "smith".
   •   Characters are converted to their sort code values for comparison. Using the default case-sensitive collation table,
       all uppercase letters sort before all lowercase letters (for example, a is greater than Z, but less than b.) Note also that
       in character code uppercase A is less than [ , \ , ^ , _, and ' , but lowercase a is greater than these.
   •   You cannot compare data of different DATE, DATETIME, and DATETIME-TZ data types to each other using LE.
       You must first convert different date and datetime data types to the same data type before doing a comparison between
       them.
   •   You can use LE to compare a LONGCHAR variable to another LONGCHAR or CHARACTER variable. The variable
       values are converted to -cpinternal for comparison and must convert without error, or the AVM raises a run-time
       error.
   •   You cannot use LE to compare any of the LOB data types, including BLOB or CLOB.
   •   You can use LE to compare two enums, including both ABL and .NET enums, as long as they are the same enum
       type. LE compares the underlying numerical values of the enumerators.



< > Special character
     Compares two expressions and returns a TRUE value if they are not equal.

   Syntax

       expression { NE | <> } expression


   expression
                A constant, field name, variable name, or expression. The expressions on either side of the NE or must
                be of the same data type.

   Example
   This procedure displays information for all items that appear in the catalog. (The CatPage field is not equal to the
   Unknown value (?) or 0.)
   r-ne.p

       FOR EACH Item NO-LOCK WHERE Item.CatPage <> ? AND Item.CatPage <> 0:
         DISPLAY Item.ItemNum Item.ItemName Item.CatPage
            WITH TITLE "Catalog Items" USE-TEXT.
       END.



   Notes
   •   By default, the AVM uses the collation rules you specify to compare characters and sort records. The collation rules
       specified with the Collation Table (-cpcoll) startup parameter take precedence over a collation specified for any
       database the AVM accesses during the session, except when the AVM uses or modifies pre-existing indexes. If you
       do not specify a collation with the -cpcoll startup parameter, the AVM uses the language collation rules defined
       for the first database on the command line. If you do not specify a database on the command line, the AVM uses the
       collation rules with the default name "basic" (which might or might not exist in the convmap.cp file).
   •   If one of the expressions has the Unknown value (?) and the other does not, the result is TRUE. If both have the
       Unknown value (?), the result is FALSE. For SQL, however, if one or both expressions have the Unknown value
       (?), then the result is the Unknown value (?).
   •   You can compare character strings with NE. Most character comparisons are case insensitive in ABL. That is, all
       characters are converted to uppercase prior to comparisons. However, it is possible to define fields and variables as
       case sensitive (although it is not advised, unless strict ANSI SQL adherence is required). If either expression is a
       field or variable defined as case sensitive, the comparison is case sensitive and "Smith" does not equal "smith".
   •   Characters are converted to their sort code values for comparison. Using the default case-sensitive collation table,
       all uppercase letters sort before all lowercase letters (for example, a is greater than Z, but less than b.) Note also that
       in character code uppercase A is less than [ , \ , ^ , _, and ' , but lowercase a is greater than these.
   •   You cannot compare data of different DATE, DATETIME, and DATETIME-TZ data types to each other using NE.
       You must first convert different date and datetime data types to the same data type before doing a comparison between
       them.
   •   You can use NE to compare one BLOB field to another. The AVM performs a byte-by-byte comparison.
   •   You can use NE to compare a LONGCHAR variable to another LONGCHAR or CHARACTER variable. The
       variable values are converted to -cpinternal for comparison and must convert without error, or the AVM raises
       a run-time error.
   •   You can use NE to compare a CLOB field only to the Unknown value (?).
   •   You can use NE to compare two enums, including both ABL and .NET enums, as long as they are the same enum
       type. NE compares the underlying numerical values of the enumerators.



> Special character
    Returns a TRUE value if the first of two expressions is greater than the second expression.

   Syntax

     expression { GT | > } expression


   expression
                A constant, field name, variable name, or any combination of these. The expressions on either side of
                the GT or > must be of the same data type, although one might be integer and the other decimal.

   Example
   This procedure lists all items that have a negative OnHand quantity or more than 90% of the OnHand inventory currently
   allocated:
   r-gt.p

     FOR EACH Item NO-LOCK:
       IF Item.Allocated > 0 THEN IF (Item.OnHand <= 0) OR
          (Item.Allocated / Item.OnHand > .9) THEN
          DISPLAY Item.ItemNum Item.ItemName Item.OnHand Item.Allocated.
     END.

   Notes
   •   By default, the AVM uses the collation rules you specify to compare characters and sort records. The collation rules
       specified with the Collation Table (-cpcoll) startup parameter take precedence over a collation specified for any
       database the AVM accesses during the session, except when the AVM uses or modifies pre-existing indexes. If you
       do not specify a collation with the -cpcoll startup parameter, the AVM uses the language collation rules defined
       for the first database on the command line. If you do not specify a database on the command line, the AVM uses the
       collation rules with the default name "basic" (which might or might not exist in the convmap.cp file).
   •   If either of the expressions is the Unknown value (?), then the result is the Unknown value (?); if both of the
       expressions are the Unknown value (?), then the result is FALSE. For more information on the Unknown value (?),
       see ? Special character on page 18.
   •   You can compare character strings with GT. Most character comparisons are case insensitive in ABL. That is,
       upper-case and lower-case characters have the same sort value. However, it is possible to define fields and variables
       as case sensitive (although it is not advised, unless strict ANSI SQL adherence is required). If either expression is a
       field or variable defined as case sensitive, the comparison is case sensitive and "Smith" does not equal "smith".
   •   Characters are converted to their sort code values for comparison. Using the default case-sensitive collation table,
       all uppercase letters sort before all lowercase letters (for example, a is greater than Z, but less than b). Note also that
       in character code uppercase A is less than [ , \ , ^ , _, and ' , but lowercase a is greater than these.
   •   You cannot compare data of different DATE, DATETIME, and DATETIME-TZ data types to each other using GT.
       You must first convert different date and datetime data types to the same data type before doing a comparison between
       them.
   •   You can use GT to compare a LONGCHAR variable to another LONGCHAR or CHARACTER variable. The
       variable values are converted to -cpinternal for comparison and must convert without error, or the AVM raises
       a run-time error.
   •   You cannot use GT to compare one CLOB field to another.
   •   You can use GT to compare two enums, including both ABL and .NET enums, as long as they are the same enum
       type. GT compares the underlying numerical values of the enumerators.


> = Special character
    Returns a TRUE value if the first of two expressions is greater than or equal to the second expression.

   Syntax

       expression { GE | >= } expression


   expression
                A constant, field name, variable name, or any combination of these. The expressions on either side of
                the GE or >= must be of the same data type, although one might be integer and the other decimal.

   Example
   This procedure displays item information for those items whose OnHand value is greater than or equal to 120:
   r-ge.p

       FOR EACH Item NO-LOCK WHERE Item.OnHand >= 120:
         DISPLAY Item.ItemNum Item.ItemName Item.OnHand.
       END.



   Notes
   •   By default, the AVM uses the collation rules you specify to compare characters and sort records. The collation rules
       specified with the Collation Table (-cpcoll) startup parameter take precedence over a collation specified for any
       database the AVM accesses during the session, except when the AVM uses or modifies pre-existing indexes. If you
       do not specify a collation with the -cpcoll startup parameter, the AVM uses the language collation rules defined
       for the first database on the command line. If you do not specify a database on the command line, the AVM uses the
       collation rules with the default name "basic" (which might or might not exist in the convmap.cp file).
   •   If either of the expressions is the Unknown value (?), then the result is the Unknown value (?); if both expressions
       are the Unknown value (?), then the result is TRUE. For more information on the Unknown value (?), see ? Special
       character on page 18.
   •   You can compare character strings with GE. Most character comparisons are case insensitive in ABL. That is,
       upper-case and lower-case characters have the same sort value. However, it is possible to define fields and variables
       as case sensitive (although it is not advised, unless strict ANSI SQL adherence is required). If either expression is a
       field or variable defined as case sensitive, the comparison is case sensitive and "Smith" does not equal "smith".
   •   Characters are converted to their sort code values for comparison. Using the default case-sensitive collation table,
       all uppercase letters sort before all lowercase letters (for example, a is greater than Z, but less than b.) Note also that
       in character code uppercase A is less than [ , \ , ^ , _, and ' , but lowercase a is greater than these.
   •   You cannot compare data of different DATE, DATETIME, and DATETIME-TZ data types to each other using GE.
       You must first convert different date and datetime data types to the same data type before doing a comparison between
       them.
   •   You can use GE to compare a LONGCHAR variable to another LONGCHAR or CHARACTER variable. The variable
       values are converted to -cpinternal for comparison and must convert without error, or the AVM raises a run-time
       error.
   •   You cannot use GE to compare any of the LOB data types, including BLOB or CLOB.
   •   You can use GE to compare two enums, including both ABL and .NET enums, as long as they are the same enum
       type. GE compares the underlying numerical values of the enumerators.



" "Character-string literal
    Specifies a literal character-string value.

    Syntax

      "characters" [ : [ R | L | C | T ][ U ] [ max-length ] ]


    characters
          The literal contents of the character string.
   R|L|C|T
          Specifies the justification of the string within its maximum length: right, left, centered, or trimmed,
          respectively. The default justification depends on how the string is used. If the string is displayed with
          side labels, the default is right justification. If column labels are used, the defaults are left justification
          for character fields and right justification for numeric fields. Strings used in expressions are trimmed
          by default.
               •   R means right justified and padded on the left with spaces: "Hello":R10 = " Hello".
               •   L means left justified and padded on the right with spaces: "Hello":L10 = "Hello ".
               •   C means centered within the string and padded on both the right and left as needed: "Hello":C10
                   = " Hello ".
               •   T means trimmed of leading and trailing blanks (although storage space and screen space is still
                   allocated for the maximum number of characters): " Hello":T10 = "Hello" (but screen
                   and storage space is still reserved for 10 characters).
   U
               Specifies that the string is untranslatable. If you do not specify U, then the string is assumed to be
               translatable, unless the DEFAULT-UNTRANSLATABLE option of the COMPILE statement on page
               171 or the Default Untranslatable (-defuntrans) startup parameter (for a session) is used.
   max-length
             The number of characters reserved for the string contents in the text segment. The default is the length
             of the string itself. You might want to specify a longer length if you expect a translation of the string
             to be longer. The longest length you can specify is 5120 characters.

   Note
   If you include the colon (:) after the quoted string, you must supply at least one option. Otherwise, ABL treats the colon
   as a statement separator.

<T> Generic type reference
   <T> is a notation for type parameters.

   Syntax

       <T>


   Note: This topic applies to ABL generic types. For information on .NET generic types, see Reference .NET generic
   types in Use .NET Classes in ABL Applications.

   Generic type
   A generic type is an object-oriented type (for a class or interface) that accepts one or more type parameters, allowing
   the class to defer the specification of such parameters until the class is declared and instantiated by a client of the class.
   This allows code for the class or interface to be written once, instead of having to write multiple classes or interfaces
   for each required type. The implementation of generic types also eliminates the cost of having to cast references at
   runtime.
   A list is a common example for a generic type. A list generic type has common functionality for any type of list, and
   you can store any kind of objects, or related objects, depending on the requirements, without having to write a different
   class for each type of object you want to store in the list.
   Note: User-defined generic types are not supported.


{ } Argument reference
   References the value of an argument that a procedure passes to a called external procedure file or to an include file.
   ABL converts each argument to a character format. This conversion removes the surrounding double-quotes if the
   parameter was specified as a character string constant in the RUN statement or include file reference.
   When one procedure is called from another and arguments are used, ABL recompiles the called procedure, substituting
   the arguments that the calling procedure passes, and then runs the called procedure.

   Syntax

       { { n | &argument-name } }


   Enter the braces ({}) as shown; they do not represent syntax notation in this description.
   n
               The number of the argument being referred to. If n = 0, ABL substitutes the name of the current
               procedure (the name you used when you called it, not the full pathname) as the argument. If n = *,
               ABL substitutes all arguments that the calling procedure passes (but not the name {0}). If you refer
               to the nth parameter and the calling procedure does not supply it, {n} is ignored.
   &argument-name
            The name of the argument being referred to. If you refer to an argument-name and the calling procedure
            does not supply it, ABL ignores {&argument-name}.                                                                                                       
            If argument-name is an asterisk (*), ABL substitutes all arguments that the calling procedure passes.
            It also adds quotation marks to each parameter, so you can pass the named argument list through
            multiple levels of include files.
            Note: It is invalid to pass both numbered and named arguments within a single pair of braces. Although
            this will not cause a compile-time or run-time error, the arguments will not be passed correctly.

Examples
The procedure r-arg.p runs procedure r-arg2.p, passing the arguments customer and name to r-arg2.p. ABL
substitutes these arguments for {1} and {2} in the r-arg2.p procedure.
r-arg.p

    RUN r-arg2.p "customer" "name"


r-arg2.p

    FOR EACH {1}:
      DISPLAY {2}.
    END.


The r-inc.p procedure defines the variables txt and num, and assigns the values "Progress VERSION" and "7" to
them. The r-inc.p procedure includes the r-inc.ifile and passes the &int and &str arguments to the include
file. Because the parameters are named, their order is unimportant. The called procedure can find each argument,
regardless of placement. The r-inc.i include file displays a message that consists of the passed arguments. The
asterisk argument displays all the parameters as they are listed in the r-inc.p procedure.
r-inc.p

    DEFINE VARIABLE cTxt AS CHARACTER NO-UNDO.
    DEFINE VARIABLE iNum AS INTEGER   NO-UNDO.

    ASSIGN
      cTxt = "Progress VERSION"
      iNum = 12.

    {r-inc.i &int=iNum &str=cTxt}


r-inc.i

    MESSAGE {&str}             /* the &str named argument */
            {&int}.            /* the &int named argument */

    MESSAGE "An asterisk displays all the arguments:"
            {*}        /* all the arguments passed by the calling procedure */



Notes
    •   If you pass {} arguments using the RUN statement, you cannot precompile the called procedure. When ABL compiles
    a procedure, it must have all the values the procedure needs. So, if you pass arguments to a procedure you are calling
    with the RUN statement, the AVM evaluates those arguments when the calling procedure is run, not when it is
    compiled.
    •   You can use the name of an include file as an argument to another include file. For example, a reference to {{1}}
        in an included procedure causes ABL to include the statements from the file with the name that passed as the first
        argument.
    •   Use DEFINE PARAMETER to define a run-time parameter in a called subprocedure. Each parameter requires its
        own DEFINE statement. The parameters must be specified in the RUN statement in the same order as defined with
        DEFINE statements.
    •   ABL disregards an empty pair of braces ({}).
    •   The maximum length of the arguments you can pass to an include file is determined by the Input Characters (-inp)
        startup parameter.
    •   An argument argument-name behaves like a scoped preprocessor name. Thus, if you define a preprocessor name,
        argument-name, its value replaces the value of any argument argument-name passed to the same file at the point
        where the preprocessor name, argument-name, is defined.

    
{ } Include file reference
    Causes ABL to retrieve the statements in a file and compile them as part of the main procedure if it encounters the file's
    name inside braces ({}) when compiling the procedure. You can name arguments you want substituted in the file before
    compilation.

    Syntax

        { include-file
        [ argument ... | {&argument-name = "argument-value" } ... ] }


    Enter the braces ({}) as shown; they do not represent syntax notation in this description.
    include-file
                   The name of an external operating system file that contains statements you want included during the
                   compilation of a main procedure. If the file you name has an unqualified pathname, ABL searches
                   directories based on the PROPATH environment variable. This filename follows normal operating
                   system naming conventions and is case sensitive on UNIX. In Windows, the pathname cannot include
                   characters outside of the non-Unicode code page. See Internationalize ABL Applications for more
                   information about Unicode and code pages.
                   When ABL compiles the main procedure (the procedure containing the { } include file reference),
                   it copies the contents of include-file into that procedure, substituting any arguments. So, you can use
                   included procedures with arguments even when you precompile a procedure.
    argument
                   A value used by include-file, as a positional argument.
                   With positional arguments, the first argument replaces {1} in the included file, the second argument
                   replaces {2}, and so on.
    &argument-name = "argument-value"
             A name/value pair used by include-file as a named argument. The argument-name is the name of the
             argument you want to pass to the include file. You can use variable names, field names, and reserved
             words as argument names. The argument-value is the value of the argument you pass to the include
             file. Enclose the argument-value in quotation marks, as shown.
                   With named arguments, argument-value replaces {&argument-name} in the included file.
                                      
Examples
The r-inc1.p procedure uses externally defined and maintained files (r-fcust.i and r-dcust.i) for the layout
and display of a customer report. You can use these same include files in many procedures.
r-inc1.p

  FOR EACH Customer NO-LOCK:
    {r-fcust.i}
    {r-dcust.i}
  END.


r-fcust.i

  FORM Customer.CustNum Customer.Name LABEL "Customer Name"
    Customer.Phone FORMAT "999-999-9999".


r-dcust.i

  DISPLAY Customer.CustNum Customer.Name Customer.Phone.


The r-incl2.p example references an include file (r-show.i) that can take up to five arguments, and the main
routine passes four arguments.
r-incl2.p

  DEFINE VARIABLE var1 AS INTEGER NO-UNDO INITIAL 9.
  DEFINE VARIABLE var2 AS DECIMAL NO-UNDO INITIAL 6.43.
  DEFINE VARIABLE var3 AS LOGICAL NO-UNDO INITIAL TRUE.

  /* any statements */
  {r-show.i point-A var1 var2 var3}
  /* any statements */


r-show.i

  MESSAGE "At" "{1}" "{2}" {2} "{3}" {3} "{4}" {4} "{5}" {5}.


When the main procedure is compiled, the line referencing the r-show.i include file is replaced by the following
line:

  MESSAGE At point-A var1 9 var2 6.43 var3 yes


This example shows how you can use include files to extend ABL. The main procedure uses a new statement, r-show.i,
to display the values of fields or variables at various points in a procedure. The include file in this example can handle
up to five passed arguments. The main procedure only passes four (point-A, var1, var2, and var3).
The r-custin.p procedure displays a frame for each customer that you can update with customer information. The
procedure includes r-cstord.i and passes the named argument &frame-options, and the value of the argument
(CENTERED ROW 3 NO-LABEL) to the include file. When the include file references the &frame-options                                                                                                  
argument, it uses the value of the argument, and therefore displays the OVERLAY frame cust-ord as a centered
frame at row 3 without a label.
r-custin.p

    FOR EACH Customer:
      {r-cstord.i &frame-options = "CENTERED ROW 3 NO-LABEL"}.
      UPDATE Customer.CustNum Customer.Name Customer.Address Customer.Address2
         Customer.City Customer.State Customer.PostalCode Customer.Phone
         Customer.CreditLimit WITH FRAME cust-ord.
    END.


r-cstord.i

    FORM "Cust #" AT 1 Customer.CustNum AT 10 SKIP(1)
      Customer.Name AT 10
      customer.Address AT 10
      customer.Address2 AT 10
      customer.City AT 10 Customer.State Customer.PostalCode SKIP(1)
      "Phone " AT 1 Customer.Phone FORMAT "999/999-9999" AT 10
      "Max Crd" AT 1 Customer.CreditLimit AT 10
      WITH FRAME cust-ord OVERLAY {&frame-options}.


Include files are particularly useful for using form layouts in multiple procedures, especially if you do not include the
keyword FORM or the closing period (.) of the FORM statement. Thus, the following r-incl3.p procedure includes
the r-cust.f file as the definition of a FORM statement.
r-incl3.p

    FORM {r-cust.f}.


r-cust.f

    Customer.CustNum
    Customer.Name SKIP(2)
    Customer.State


The r-incl4.p procedure uses the same include file as a layout for a DISPLAY statement:
r-incl4.p

    FOR EACH Customer NO-LOCK:
      DISPLAY {r-cust.f} WITH 3 DOWN.
    END.



Notes
   •   You can pass a series of positional arguments or a series of named arguments to an include file, but you cannot pass
    a combination of positional and named arguments to an include file.
   •   When you use braces to include one procedure in another, ABL does not include the second procedure until it
       compiles the first one. This technique has the same effect as using the Editor to copy statements into the main
       procedure. At times, separate include files are easier to maintain.
   •   You can nest include files. (They can contain references to other include files.) The number of nested include files
       is limited by the number of file descriptors available on the system.
   •   When you have a base procedure and want to make several copies of it, changing it slightly each time, use include
       files with parameters. For example, at times you might only want to change the name of some files or fields used by
       the procedure.
   •   If you define a preprocessor name and later pass a compile-time argument with the same name, but a different value,
       to a procedure or include file, the value of the initial preprocessor name remains unchanged. Thus, a compile-time
       argument is scoped to the file to which it is passed.
   •   Instead of maintaining duplicate source files, create a single include file with the variable portions (such as the names
       of files and fields) replaced by {1}, {2}, etc. Then each procedure you write can use that include file, passing file
       and field names as arguments.
   •   You can use the name of an include file as an argument to another include file. For example, a reference to {{1}}
       in an include file causes ABL to include the statements from the file with the name that passed as the first argument.
   •   ABL disregards an empty pair of braces ({}).
   •   If you use double quotes (" ") around arguments in an argument list, ABL removes them. However, if you use single
       quotes (' '), ABL passes them. To pass one set of double quotes, you must use four sets of double quotes.
   •   When ABL reads an include file into the source, it appends a space character to the end of an include file. For
       example, the following include file r-string.i contains data that is used by r-incstr.p.
       r-string.i

         abcde


       r-incstr.p

         DISPLAY LENGTH("{r-string.i}").


       Although r-string.i contains five letters, when you run r-incstr.p, it returns the value 6 because ABL
       appends a space character to the end of r-string.i.
   •   The maximum length of the arguments you can pass to an include file is determined by the Input Characters (-inp)
       startup parameter.

   
{ } Preprocessor name reference
   References the value of a preprocessor name in any ABL or preprocessor expression.

   Syntax

       { &preprocessor-name }


   Enter the braces ({}) as shown; they do not represent syntax notation in this description.
      &preprocessor-name
              Expands the name, preprocessor-name, to its defined value. You can define preprocessor names using
              either the &GLOBAL-DEFINE preprocessor directive or the &SCOPED-DEFINE preprocessor
              directive. ABL also provides a set of built-in preprocessor names that you can reference for a variety
              of session information. The following table lists each built-in preprocessor name with its description.
              Table 3: Built-in preprocessor names

                 The preprocessor name      Expands to an unquoted string . . .
                 ...
                 BATCH-MODE                 Equal to "yes" if the Batch (-b) startup parameter was used to start
                                            the client session. Otherwise, it expands to "no".
                 FILE-NAME                  That contains the name of the file being compiled.1 If you want only
                                            the name of the file as specified in the { } Include File Reference,
                                            the RUN statement, or the COMPILE statement, use the argument
                                            reference {0}.
                 LINE-NUMBER                That contains the current line number in the file being compiled. If
                                            you place this reference in an include file, the line number is
                                            calculated from the beginning of the include file.
                 OPSYS                      That contains the name of the operating system on which the file is
                                            being compiled. The OPSYS name can have the same values as the
                                            OPSYS function. The possible values are "UNIX" and "WIN32".2
                 PROCESS-                   That contains the bit value of the AVM process on which the file is
                 ARCHITECTURE               compiled. The possible values include "32" and "64".3
                 SEQUENCE                   Representing a unique integer value that is sequentially generated
                                            each time the SEQUENCE preprocessor name is referenced. When
                                            a compilation begins, the value of {&SEQUENCE} is 0; each time
                                            {&SEQUENCE} is referenced, the value increases by 1. To store
                                            the value of a reference to SEQUENCE, you must define another
                                            preprocessor name as {&SEQUENCE} at the point in your code
                                            you want the value retained.
                 WINDOW-SYSTEM              That contains the name of the windowing system in which the file
                                            is being compiled. The possible values include "MS-WINDOWS",
                                            "MS-WIN95", "MS-WINXP", and "TTY".4




1
    When running the source code of a procedure file loaded into the Procedure Editor or the AppBuilder, {&FILE-NAME}
    expands to a temporary filename, not the name of the file under which the source code might be saved.
2
    ABL supports an override option that enables applications that need to return the value of MS-DOS for all Microsoft
    operating systems to do so. For example, if you do not want the value WIN32 to be returned when the operating system
    is recognized, you can override this return value by defining the Opsys key in the Startup section of the current
    environment, which can be in the registry or in an initialization file. If the Opsys key is located, the OPSYS function
    returns the value associated with the Opsys key on all platforms.
3
    ABL provides only bit value of the AVM process. The PROCESS-ARCHITECTURE preprocessor name lets you
    generate r-code file for a single target, either for 32- or 64-bit applications.
4
    ABL supports an override option for the &WINDOW-SYSTEM preprocessor name that provides backward compatibility.
    This option enables applications that need the WINDOW-SYSTEM preprocessor name to return the value of
    MS-WINDOWS for all Microsoft operating systems to do so. To establish this override value, define the WindowSystem
    key in the Startup section of the current environment, which can be in the registry or in an initialization file. If the
    WindowSystem key is located, the WINDOW-SYSTEM preprocessor name returns the value associated with the
    WindowSystem key on all platforms

Example
This procedure displays a message indicating whether the AVM is running on 32- or 64-bit Windows. This example is
not valid if compiled in a 32-bit AVM and run in a 64-bit AVM, and vice versa.

  DEFINE VARIABLE hProcess AS INTEGER NO-UNDO.
  DEFINE VARIABLE Wow64Process AS INTEGER NO-UNDO.
  DEFINE VARIABLE resultValue AS INTEGER NO-UNDO.

   &IF {&PROCESS-ARCHITECTURE} = 64 &THEN
    /* 64-bit processes always run on 64-bit Windows */
    MESSAGE "64-bit process running on 64-bit Windows".
  &ELSE
    /* If a 32-bit process is running under WOW64 it must be
    ** running on 64-bit Windows. Otherwise, it is running on
    ** 32-bit Windows.
    */
    RUN GetCurrentProcess(OUTPUT hProcess).
    RUN IsWow64Process(hProcess, INPUT-OUTPUT Wow64Process, OUTPUT resultValue).


     MESSAGE "32-bit process running on " + (IF Wow64Process > 0 THEN "64" ELSE
   "32") + "-bit Windows".
  &ENDIF

   PROCEDURE GetCurrentProcess EXTERNAL "kernel32.dll":
    DEFINE RETURN PARAMETER hProcess AS LONG.
  END.

   PROCEDURE IsWow64Process EXTERNAL "kernel32.dll":
    DEFINE INPUT PARAMETER hProcess AS LONG.
    DEFINE INPUT-OUTPUT PARAMETER Wow64Process AS HANDLE TO LONG.
    DEFINE RETURN PARAMETER resultValue AS LONG.
  END.


The following table lists the additional built-in preprocessor names that apply to SpeedScript.
Table 4: SpeedScript built-in preprocessor names

The preprocessor name . . .       Expands to an unquoted string . . .
DISPLAY                           DISPLAY {&WEBSTREAM}
OUT                               PUT {&WEBSTREAM} UNFORMATTED
OUT-FMT                           PUT {&WEBSTREAM} FORMATTED
OUT-LONG                          EXPORT {&WEBSTREAM}
WEBSTREAM                         STREAM WebStream



Examples
The r-prprc1.p procedure shows how you can reference a built-in preprocessor name and include it in a character
string.
r-prprc1.p

  MESSAGE "The current operating system is" "{&OPSYS}."
    VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.

The procedure r-prprc2.p shows how to capture the value of a {&SEQUENCE} reference. In this example,
{&SEQUENCE} is referenced three times, once each to assign its value to wvar (0) and xvar (1) at run time. The
third reference defines the preprocessor name Last-Value with the value 3. As shown, Last-Value is assigned unchanged
to both yvar and zvar, each of which takes the value 3 at run time.

r-prprc2.p

  DEFINE     VARIABLE    wvar    AS   INTEGER    NO-UNDO.
  DEFINE     VARIABLE    xvar    AS   INTEGER    NO-UNDO.
  DEFINE     VARIABLE    yvar    AS   INTEGER    NO-UNDO.
  DEFINE     VARIABLE    zvar    AS   INTEGER    NO-UNDO.

  ASSIGN
    wvar = {&SEQUENCE}
    xvar = {&SEQUENCE}.

  &GLOBAL-DEFINE Last-Value {&SEQUENCE}

  ASSIGN
    yvar = {&Last-Value}
    zvar = {&Last-Value}.

  MESSAGE "wvar =" wvar SKIP "xvar =" xvar SKIP
          "yvar =" yvar SKIP "zvar =" zvar VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.


The procedure r-prprc3.p shows how preprocessor names override compile-time arguments. In this example,
r-prprc3.p defines the preprocessor name My-Name as "Daniel". It then passes the compile-time argument My-Name,
with the value "David", to the include file r-prprc3.i, which in turn defines a preprocessor name My-Name as
"Donald".

r-prprc3.p

  &SCOPED-DEFINE My-Name "Daniel"
  {r-prprc3.i &My-Name = "David"}
  MESSAGE "My-Name preprocessed in r-prprc3.p is" {&My-Name} + "."
    VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.


r-prprc3.i

  MESSAGE "My-Name argument in r-prprc3.i is" "{&My-Name}" + "."
    VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.
  &SCOPED-DEFINE My-Name "Donald"
  MESSAGE "My-Name preprocessed in r-prprc3.i is" {&My-Name} + "."
    VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX


During execution, the first message included by r-prprc3.i displays the value of the My-Name argument, "David".
The second message included by r-prprc3.i displays the value of the following My-Name preprocessor name,
defined as "Donald", permanently overriding "David" passed by the My-Name argument. Finally, the message in
r-prprc3.p displays the value of the My-Name preprocessor name that was initially defined there, "Daniel", because
the value from My-Name established in r-prprc3.i ("Donald") went out of scope during compilation.
Note also that the reference to the My-Name compile-time argument in r-prprc3.i is inside double-quotes, because
ABL passes string constant values for compile-time arguments without the surrounding double-quotes.

   You can encounter compilation problems mixing preprocessor names with compile-time argument names. The following
   example, a variation of r-prprc3.i, does not compile, even when passed a My-Name argument as an include file.
   This is because the preprocessor My-Name value overrides the argument My-Name value, as shown:

       &SCOPED-DEFINE My-Name "Donald"
       MESSAGE "My-Name preprocessed in r-prprc3.i is" {&My-Name} + "."
         VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.
       MESSAGE "My-Name argument in r-prprc3.i is" "{&My-Name}" + "."
         VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.


   Because the preprocessor My-Name defines a quoted "Donald" value, ABL replaces "{&My-Name}" in the fourth line
   with ""Donald"". This appears to the compiler as two empty strings and an unknown variable reference (Donald).
   Although you can do it with care, in general, avoid using the same names for compile-time arguments and preprocessor
   names.

   Notes
   •   ABL expands preprocessor names wherever and in whatever context it finds them, including inside quoted character
       strings.
   •   If you define a preprocessor name in the same file and with the same name as a compile-time argument passed to
       the file, the value of the preprocessor name takes precedence over the value of the argument name from the point
       where the preprocessor name is defined.


&GLOBAL-DEFINE preprocessor directive
   Globally defines a compile-time constant (preprocessor name).

   Syntax

       &GLOBAL-DEFINE preprocessor-name definition


   preprocessor-name
              The preprocessor name (compile-time constant) that you supply. ABL reserved keywords are allowed,
              but cannot be used in preprocessor expressions.
   definition
                A string of characters (or preprocessor references that evaluate to a string of characters) whose content
                the preprocessor substitutes for preprocessor-name during compilation. If the definition is longer than
                one line, a tilde (~) at the end of a line indicates continuation to the next line.

   Examples
   In this example, the preprocessor name MAX-EXPENSE is defined as the text string "5000":

       &GLOBAL-DEFINE MAX-EXPENSE 5000
    Wherever the reference {&MAX-EXPENSE} appears in the source code, the preprocessor substitutes the text string
   "5000". For example, the preprocessor changes this line of code:

       IF tot-amount <= {&MAX-EXPENSE} THEN DO:


   To this line:

       IF tot-amount <= 5000 THEN DO:



   Notes
   •   You must place the &GLOBAL-DEFINE directive at the beginning of a line, preceded only by blanks, tab characters,
       or multi-line comments (/* comment */).
   •   The preprocessor trims all leading and trailing spaces from definition.
   •   The syntax of the &GLOBAL-DEFINE and &SCOPED-DEFINE directives are identical but these directives are used
       differently.
   •   If duplicate &GLOBAL-DEFINE directives are specified for the same preprocessor-name, the last &GLOBAL-DEFINE
       directive is applied.
   •   The compiler removes /* Multi-line comments */ on page 39 on lines of ABL code with preprocessor directives.
       To retain comments, use // Single-line comments on page 40 or escape the multi-line comment using a tilde (~).
       For example, &SCOPED-DEFINE VAR3 DEF VAR xpos AS INT. /~* column position of
       fill-in *~/.


&IF, &THEN, &ELSEIF, &ELSE, and &ENDIF preprocessor directives
   These directives set logical conditions for the inclusion of blocks of code to compile.

   Syntax

       &IF expression &THEN
         block
       [ &ELSEIF expression &THEN
         block]...
       [ &ELSE
         block]
       &ENDIF


   expression
                An expression that can contain certain preprocessor name references, the operators listed in the
                "Preprocessor operators" table below, the ABL functions listed in the "Functions allowed in preprocessor
                expressions" table below, and the DEFINED( ) preprocessor function.
   When it encounters an &IF directive, the preprocessor evaluates the expression that immediately follows. This expression
   can continue for more than one line; the &THEN directive indicates the end of the expression. If the expression evaluates
   to TRUE, then the block of code between it and the next &ELSEIF, &ELSE, or &ENDIF is compiled. If the expression
   evaluates to FALSE, the block of code is not compiled and the preprocessor proceeds to the next &ELSEIF, &ELSE,
  or &ENDIF directive. No include files referenced in this block of code are included in the final source. You can nest
&IF directives.
The expression that follows the &ELSEIF directive is evaluated only if the &IF expression tests false. If the &ELSEIF
expression tests TRUE, the block of code between it and the next &ELSEIF, &ELSE, or &ENDIF directive is compiled.
If the &ELSEIF expression tests FALSE, the preprocessor proceeds to the next directive.
The block of code between the &ELSE and &ENDIF directives is compiled only if the &IF expression and the &ELSEIF
expressions all test false. If there are no &ELSEIF directives, the block of code is compiled if the &IF expression tests
false.
Once any &IF or &ELSEIF expression evaluates to TRUE, no other block of code within the &IF...&ENDIF block
is compiled.
The &ENDIF directive indicates the end of the conditional tests and the end of the final block of code to compile.
The following table shows how preprocessor expressions are evaluated.
Table 5: Preprocessor expressions

Type of expression                       TRUE                                    FALSE
LOGICAL                                  TRUE                                    FALSE
CHARACTER                                non-empty                               empty
INTEGER                                  non-zero                                0
INT64                                    non-zero                                0
DECIMAL                                  not supported                           not supported


The following table lists the operators supported within preprocessor expressions. These operators have the same
precedence as the regular ABL operators.
Table 6: Preprocessor operators

Operator                                      Description
+                                             Addition
-                                             Subtraction
*                                             Multiplication
/                                             Division
=                                             Equality
<>                                            Inequality
>                                             Greater than
<                                             Less than
=>                                            Greater than or equal to
<=                                            Less than or equal to
AND                                           Logical and
OR                                            Logical or
NOT                                           Logical not
BEGINS                                        Compares the beginning letters of two expressions
MATCHES                                       Compares two strings


   The following table lists the ABL functions supported within preprocessor expressions.
   Table 7: Functions allowed in preprocessor expressions

   ABSOLUTE                                ASC                                    AUDIT-ENABLED
   DATE                                    DAY                                    DBTYPE
   DECIMAL                                 ENCODE                                 ENTRY
   ETIME                                   EXP                                    FILL
   INDEX                                   INT64                                  INTEGER
   KEYWORD                                 KEYWORDALL                             LC
   LEFT-TRIM                               LENGTH                                 LIBRARY
   LOG                                     LOOKUP                                 MATCHES
   MAXIMUM                                 MEMBER                                 MINIMUM
   MODULO                                  MONTH                                  NUM-ENTRIES
   OPSYS                                   PROCESS-ARCHITECTURE                   PROPATH
   PROVERSION                              RANDOM                                 REPLACE
   RIGHT-TRIM                              R-INDEX                                ROUND
   SQRT                                    STRING                                 SUBSTITUTE
   SUBSTRING                               TIME                                   TODAY
   TRIM                                    TRUNCATE                               WEEKDAY
   YEAR



   Notes
   •   When the preprocessor evaluates expressions, all arithmetic operations are performed with integers. Preprocessor
       name references used in arithmetic operations must evaluate to integers.

   See also
   &GLOBAL-DEFINE preprocessor directive on page 34, &SCOPED-DEFINE preprocessor directive on page 38,
   &UNDEFINE preprocessor directive on page 39


&MESSAGE preprocessor directive
   Displays a message at compile time in the Compiler Messages dialog box.
   Note: Does not apply to SpeedScript programming.

   Syntax

       &MESSAGE text-string

   text-string
                 A string of characters, preprocessor name references, named include file arguments, or any combination
                 of these that results in a character string to display. The text-string argument does not need to be quoted.

   Example
   This is a possible compile-time message directive:

       &MESSAGE Compiling the {&FILE-NAME} file.
       . . .


   If this fragment appears in a procedure file, cmessage.p, compiling this file with the COMPILE statement causes the
   following message to be included with the compiler messages:

       Compiling the cmessage.p file.



   Notes
   •   The compiler removes /* Multi-line comments */ on page 39 on lines of ABL code with preprocessor directives.
       To retain comments, use // Single-line comments on page 40 or escape the multi-line comment using a tilde (~).
       For example, &SCOPED-DEFINE VAR3 DEF VAR xpos AS INT. /~* column position of
       fill-in *~/.


&SCOPED-DEFINE preprocessor directive
   Defines a compile-time constant (preprocessor name) non-globally.

   Syntax

       &SCOPED-DEFINE preprocessor-name definition


   preprocessor-name
              The preprocessor name (compile-time constant) that you supply. ABL reserved keywords are allowed,
              but cannot be used in preprocessor expressions.
   definition
                 A string of characters (or preprocessor references that evaluate to a string of characters) whose content
                 the preprocessor substitutes for preprocessor-name during compilation. If definition is longer than on
                 line, a tilde (~) at the end of a line indicates continuation to the next line.

   Notes
   •   You must place the &SCOPED-DEFINE directive at the beginning of a line, preceded only by blanks, tab characters,
       or multi-line comments (/* comment */). The preprocessor trims all leading and trailing spaces from definition.
   •   The syntax of the &GLOBAL-DEFINE and &SCOPED-DEFINE directives are identical but these directives are used
       differently.                                                                                                 
   •   The compiler removes /* Multi-line comments */ on page 39 on lines of ABL code with preprocessor directives.
       To retain comments, use // Single-line comments on page 40 or escape the multi-line comment using a tilde (~).
       For example, &SCOPED-DEFINE VAR3 DEF VAR xpos AS INT. /~* column position of
       fill-in *~/.


&UNDEFINE preprocessor directive
   Undefines a compile-time constant (preprocessor name).

   Syntax

       &UNDEFINE preprocessor-name


   preprocessor-name
              The preprocessor name (compile-time constant) that you want to undefine.

   Notes
   •   When you use the &UNDEFINE directive, ABL warns you if the name you want to undefine was not previously
       defined.
   •   The &UNDEFINE directive undefines the currently active name. It also undefines named include file arguments.
   •   To globally define the same name more than once, use this directive to undefine the name before redefining it. If
       you do not undefine the global name before redefining it, the compiler produces a warning message for non-globally
       (scoped) defined names. For globally defined names, &UNDEFINE is optional, but recommended for code readability.
       If &UNDEFINE is not used, the last &GLOBAL-DEFINE statement is used.


/* Multi-line comments */
   Allows you to add explanatory text to code. The comment begins with /* and ends with */. This type of comment can
   wrap over multiple lines.

   Syntax

       /* comment */


   comment
               Descriptive text.

   Examples
   The r-comm.p example uses comments to document the history of procedure modifications.
                                                                                                 
   r-comm.p

     /* Procedure written             9/5/87 by CHC
                  revised             9/27/87 by DG */

     FOR EACH Customer NO-LOCK:
       DISPLAY Customer.CustNum Customer.Name Customer.Contact Customer.Phone.
     END.


   The r-comm2.p example uses comments to describe what the procedure does.
   r-comm2.p

     /* Step through unshipped orders */
     FOR EACH Order NO-LOCK WHERE Order.ShipDate = ?:
       /* Display order date, promise date, terms */
       DISPLAY Order.OrderDate Order.PromiseDate Order.Terms.
       /*
          FOR EACH OrderLine OF Order NO-LOCK:
            /* Display all OrderLines of each Order */
            DISPLAY OrderLine.
          END.
       */
     END.


   The comment symbols that enclose the inner FOR EACH block turn that block into a comment for testing purposes.
   You can nest comments, so ABL correctly processes any comments already in the bypassed code. Both multi-line
   comments and single-line comments can be nested inside a multi-line comment.

  
// Single-line comments
   Allows you to add explanatory text to code. The comment begins with a double slash (//) and ends at a newline character
   (\n), a carriage return (\r), or the end of the file.

   Syntax

     // comment


   comment
               Descriptive text.
   Note: Comments can be nested.

   Examples
   This example uses a comment to document a procedure modification:

       // Procedure written            9/5/87 by CHC
       //           revised            9/27/87 by DG

       FOR EACH Customer NO-LOCK:
         DISPLAY Customer.CustNum Customer.Name Customer.Contact Customer.Phone.
       END.


   To be properly interpreted as the beginning of a single-line comment, the "//" must be preceded by a line break or
   white space. In the first line of code below, the text between "//" and the end of the line will be interpreted as a
   comment, but it will not in the second line:

       RUN r-upord.p. // Update customer's orders

       RUN r-upord.p.// Update customer's orders



   Notes
                CAUTION: If you need to use // at the beginning of a pathname, such as in RUN //dir1/file, the
   •            pathname will be interpreted as a comment because the // is preceded by a space. Enclosing the pathname
                in quotes ensures that the text following // will not be treated as a comment. Pathnames that contain // in
                their interior, such as in RUN parent//dir1/file, will work as expected.

   •   Both multi-line comments and single-line comments can be nested inside a single-line comment.


+ Unary positive operator
   Preserves the positive or negative value of a numeric expression. Do not confuse this operator with the addition operator
   that you use to add expressions together.


   Syntax

       + expression


   expression
                An expression whose value is numeric.

   Example
   In the r-unpos.p example, the sign of CreditLimit is preserved as is the sign of the sum of CreditLimit +
   100. The unary positive is not necessary; it is used simply to document the procedure, as shown:

   r-unpos.p

     DEFINE VARIABLE old-max NO-UNDO LIKE CreditLimit LABEL "Old Limit".

     FOR EACH Customer:
       old-max =+ Customer.CreditLimit.
       Customer.CreditLimit =+ (Customer.CreditLimit + 100).
       DISPLAY Customer.Name old-max Customer.CreditLimit.
     END.


+ Addition operator
   Adds two numeric expressions.

   Syntax

     expression + expression


   expression
                An expression whose value is numeric.

   Example
   In the following example, the addition operator (+) adds 100 to the value of the CreditLimit field:
   r-addn.p

     FOR EACH Customer:
       Customer.CreditLimit = Customer.CreditLimit + 100.
     END.



   Note
   Adding two decimal expressions produces a DECIMAL value. Adding two INTEGER expressions produces an INTEGER
   value. Adding an integer expression (either INTEGER or INT64) and a decimal expression produces a DECIMAL value.
   Adding an INTEGER and an INT64 expression produces an INT64 value.

  
+ Concatenation operator
   Joins two character strings or expressions. The data type of the returned value matches the data type of the expressions
   passed to the function. When one expression is LONGCHAR and the other CHARACTER, the result is a LONGCHAR.
                                                                                                
   Syntax

     expression + expression


   expression
                An expression whose value is a character string. If any expression is a LONGCHAR, the result is a
                LONGCHAR. Also, the result converts to the code page of the expression on the left.

   Example
   The r-conc.p procedure prints mailing labels. It uses the concatenation operator (+) to ensure that the third line of
   each label shows the city and state separated by a comma and a space. The FORMAT x(16) is specified to provide room
   for up to 16 characters in the result of the concatenation. If a FORMAT is not given, then the AVM displays only the
   first eight characters of the result since x(8) is the default format for a character expression.
   r-conc.p

     FOR EACH Customer NO-LOCK:
       DISPLAY SKIP(1) Customer.Name SKIP Customer.Address SKIP
          Customer.City + ", " + Customer.State FORMAT "x(16)" Customer.Country
          Customer.PostalCode SKIP(2).
     END.


   This is a label produced by this procedure:



   Notes
   If any of the string values you concatenate is the Unknown value (?), then the result is the Unknown value (?). This
   might lead to unexpected results if a field used in an expression is not mandatory. For example, you might have fields
   for a person's first name, last name, and middle initial. You might combine these into a full name with an expression
   like the following:

     DISPLAY fname + " " + minit + " " + lname FORMAT "x(36)".


   If minit is not a mandatory field, it might be set to the Unknown value (?) in some records. If so, then those records
   are displayed as the Unknown value (?). You can avoid this by using conditional code. For example:

     DISPLAY fname + " " + (IF minit <> ? THEN minit + ". " ELSE "") + " " +
       lname FORMAT "x(36)".



+ Date addition operator
   Adds a number of days to a date, producing a date result.

Syntax

    date + days


date
            An expression that evaluates to a DATE value.
days
            An expression with a value of the number of days you want to add to a date.

Example
The r-dadd.p procedure finds all unshipped orders that are at least one week overdue. If the order is not shipped and
the promised date is more than seven days ago, the procedure finds the record for the customer who placed the order
and displays the order and customer data.
r-dadd.p

    DISPLAY "ORDERS SCHEDULED TO SHIP MORE THAN ONE WEEK LATE".
    FOR EACH Order NO-LOCK WHERE Order.ShipDate = ?:
      IF TODAY > (Order.PromiseDate + 7) THEN DO:
         FIND Customer OF Order NO-LOCK.
         DISPLAY Order.OrderNum Order.CustNum Customer.Name Order.PromiseDate
           Customer.Terms.
      END.
    END.



Notes
•   To add a specific number of days and a specific number of milliseconds to a DATETIME, use the DATETIME
    function on page 279. For example:

       new-datetime = DATETIME( DATE(old-datetime) + days,
                                MTIME(old-datetime) + milliseconds ).


    The DATETIME function ensures that the time portion remains within the valid range, by adding day(s) to the date
    part when the time part goes over the number of milliseconds in a day.
•   To add a specific number of days and milliseconds to a DATETIME-TZ, use the DATETIME-TZ function on page
    281. For example:

       new-datetime-tz = DATETIME-TZ( DATE(old-datetime-tz) + days,
                                      MTIME (old-datetime-tz) + milliseconds,
                                      TIMEZONE(old-dateime-tz) ).


    The DATETIME-TZ function ensures that the time portion remains within the valid range, by adding day(s) to the
    date portion when the time part goes over the number of milliseconds in a day.



+ Datetime addition operator
   Adds a number of milliseconds to a DATETIME or a DATETIME-TZ to produce another DATETIME or DATETIME-TZ.

   Syntax

       datetime + milliseconds



       datetime-tz + milliseconds


   datetime
                 An expression that evaluates to a DATETIME value.
   milliseconds
              An expression that evaluates to an integer value specifying a number of milliseconds.
   datetime-tz
                 An expression that evaluates to a DATETIME-TZ value.

   Example
   This example returns the date and time exactly 24 hours later (dtTime) by calculating and adding the number of
   milliseconds in 24 hours to the present date and time (NOW function) and displays the result:

       DEFINE VARIABLE dtTime AS DATETIME NO-UNDO.
       DEFINE VARIABLE iHour AS INTEGER NO-UNDO INITIAL 3600000.

       dtTime = NOW + (24 * iHour).

       MESSAGE "A day later: " dtTime VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.



   Notes
   •   To add a specific number of days and a specific number of milliseconds to a DATETIME, use the DATETIME
       function on page 279. For example:

         new-datetime = DATETIME( DATE(old-datetime) + days,
                                  MTIME(old-datetime) + milliseconds ).


       The DATETIME function ensures that the time portion remains within the valid range, by adding day(s) to the date
       part when the time part goes over the number of milliseconds in a day.
   •   To add a specific number of days and milliseconds to a DATETIME-TZ, use the DATETIME-TZ function on page
       281. For example:

         new-datetime-tz = DATETIME-TZ( DATE(old-datetime-tz) + days,
                                        MTIME (old-datetime-tz) + milliseconds,
                                        TIMEZONE(old-dateime-tz) ).


       The DATETIME-TZ function ensures that the time portion remains within the valid range, by adding day(s) to the
       date portion when the time part goes over the number of milliseconds in a day.



+= Addition assignment operator
   Adds a value to an ABL data element. Provides a shorter syntax for applying concatenation, numeric addition, and
   date-based addition.

   Syntax

     field += expression [ NO-ERROR ]


   field += expression is equivalent to field = field + (expression).
   Note: Spaces are required around the assignment operator. You cannot write field+=expression.
   Note: This syntax can also be used in the ASSIGN, BUFFER-COPY, SET, and UPDATE statements.
   field
                The name of an ABL data element to which you want to add the value of expression, and that is defined
                with a data type that is compatible with the data type of expression. Valid data types are INTEGER,
                INT64, DECIMAL, CHARACTER, LONGCHAR, DATE, DATETIME, and DATETIME-TZ. The
                data element can include:
                •   A database or temp-table field
                •   A variable scoped to the current procedure, user-defined function, or method of a class, or an
                    accessible class-based variable data member, including a subscripted array variable
                •   A parameter defined for the current procedure, user-defined function, or method of a class, including
                    a subscripted array parameter
                •   A writable class-based or COM property, including a subscripted array property
                •   A writable handle attribute or system handle attribute
                •   ABL syntax that specifies the CURRENT-VALUE statement, DYNAMIC-CURRENT-VALUE
                    statement, DYNAMIC-PROPERTY statement, ENTRY statement, EXTENT statement, LENGTH
                    statement, PROPATH statement, or SUBSTRING statement
   expression
                An expression with a data type that is consistent with the data type of field.
   NO-ERROR
                The NO-ERROR option on page 726 is used to prevent the statement from raising ERROR and displaying
                error messages. With the NO-ERROR option, if ERROR is raised, then the ABL element on the left-hand
                side of the assignment is unchanged.
   Note: For more information on the rules related to assignment, see the notes section in the Assignment (=) statement
   on page 74 reference entry.
                                                                                              

Examples
The following example shows how to do string concatenation using the += assignment operator. Note that the data types
(CHAR and LONGCHAR) are compatible.

  VAR LONGCHAR str1 = "abc".
  VAR CHAR str2 = "def".

  str1 += str2.         // abcdef

  /* Equivalent statement
  str1 = str1 + str2. */


The following example shows how to do integer addition using the += assignment operator.

  VAR INT i1 = 100.
  VAR INT i2 = 50.

  i1 += i2.       // 150

  /* Equivalent statement
  i1 = i1 + i2.        */


The following example uses the += assignment operator on variables with mixed numeric data types.

  VAR INT i1 = 10.
  VAR INT64 i2 = 1000.
  VAR DECIMAL d1 = 20.5.

  i1 += i2 + d1.         // 1031

  /* Equivalent statement
  i1 = i1 + (i2 + d1). */


The following example uses the += assignment operator to add 7 days to a DATE variable.

  VAR DATE date1 = 06/01/2020.

  date1 += 7.        // 06/08/2020

  /* Equivalent statement
  date1 = date1 + 7.   */


The following example uses the += assignment operator to update a database field.

  VAR INT extraDiscount = 300.

  FIND FIRST customer.
  customer.discount += extraDiscount.

  /* Equivalent statement
  customer.discount = customer.discount + extraDiscount. */

The following example uses the += assignment operator to update a class property:

     VAR ClassA myObj.
     VAR INT myValue = 10.

     myObj = NEW ClassA().
     myObj:MyIntProp = 250.
     myObj:MyIntProp += myValue.                 // 260

     /* Equivalent statement
     myObj:MyIntProp = myObj:MyIntProp + myValue. */

The following example code uses the += assignment operator, within an ASSIGN statement, to update the CreditLimit
   field and the myCtr variable.

     VAR INT myCtr = 0.

     FOR EACH Customer WHERE NAME BEGINS "K":
          ASSIGN
              CreditLimit += 1000
              myCtr += 1.
     END.

     /* Equivalent statement
     ASSIGN CreditLimit = CreditLimit + 1000 myCtr = myCtr + 1. */


The following example code uses the += assignment operator to add to the PROPATH.
     
PROPATH += ",/myNewAppDir1,/myNewAppDir2".



- Unary negative operator
   Reverses the sign of a numeric expression. Do not confuse this operator with the subtraction operator that subtracts one
   expression from another.

   Syntax

     - expression


   expression
                An expression whose value is numeric.

   Example
   If you supply a negative value for the variable fx, the r-uneg.p procedure uses the unary negative operator (-) to
   reverse the sign of fx, producing the absolute value of fx (fabs-x).
                        
   r-uneg.p

     DEFINE VARIABLE fx     AS DECIMAL NO-UNDO LABEL "X".
     DEFINE VARIABLE fabs-x AS DECIMAL NO-UNDO LABEL "ABS(X)".

     REPEAT:
       SET fx.
       IF fx < 0 THEN
        fabs-x = -fx.
       ELSE
          fabs-x = fx.
       DISPLAY fabs-x.
     END.


- Subtraction operator
   Subtracts one numeric expression from another numeric expression.

   Syntax

     expression - expression


   expression
                An expression with a numeric value.

   Example
   The r-subt.p procedure determines the amount of inventory available by subtracting the amount allocated from the
   total on hand.
   r-subt.p

     DEFINE VARIABLE free-stock NO-UNDO LIKE on-hand LABEL "Free Stock".

     FOR EACH Item NO-LOCK:
       free-stock = Item.OnHand - Item.Allocated.
       DISPLAY Item.ItemNum Item.ItemName Item.OnHand Item.Allocated free-stock.
     END.



   Note
   Subtracting one decimal expression from another produces a DECIMAL value. Subtracting one INTEGER expression
   from another produces an INTEGER. Subtracting an integer expression (INTEGER or INT64) from a decimal expression
   (or subtracting a decimal expression from an integer expression) produces a DECIMAL value. Subtracting a mix of
   INTEGER and INT64 expressions produces an INT64 value.

  
- Date subtraction operator
   Subtracts a number of days from a date to produce a date result, or subtracts one date from another to produce an
   INTEGER result that represents the number of days between the two dates.

   Syntax

     date - { days | date }


   date
              An expression that evaluates to a DATE value.
   days
              An expression with a value of the number of days you want to subtract from date.

   Example
   This procedure finds all unshipped orders. If the promised date is more than one week ago, the procedure finds the
   customers who placed the order and displays the order and customer data.
   r-dsub.p

     DISPLAY "ORDERS SCHEDULED TO SHIP MORE THAN ONE WEEK LATE".
     FOR EACH Order NO-LOCK WHERE Order.ShipDate = ?:
       IF (TODAY - 7) > Order.PromiseDate THEN
          DISPLAY Order.OrderNum Order.CustNum Order.PromiseDate
            (TODAY - Order.PromiseDate) LABEL "Days Late".
     END.




- Datetime subtraction operator
   Subtracts a number of milliseconds from a DATETIME or a DATETIME-TZ to produce another DATETIME or
   DATETIME-TZ, or subtracts one DATETIME or DATETIME-TZ from another to produce an INT64 result in
   milliseconds.

   Syntax

     datetime - { milliseconds |datetime }



     datetime-tz - { milliseconds | datetime-tz }


   datetime
              An expression that evaluates to a DATETIME value.
   milliseconds                                                            
	      An expression that evaluates to an integer value specifying a number of milliseconds.
datetime-tz
              An expression that evaluates to a DATETIME-TZ value.

Example
This example returns the date and time exactly 24 hours ago (dtTime). It then recalculates the number of hours
(iHours) from the number of milliseconds (iMsec) since then and displays the result:

    DEFINE    VARIABLE      dtTime    AS   DATETIME     NO-UNDO.
    DEFINE    VARIABLE      iMsec     AS   INT64        NO-UNDO.
    DEFINE    VARIABLE      iHour     AS   INTEGER      NO-UNDO INITIAL 3600000.
    DEFINE    VARIABLE      fHours    AS   DECIMAL      NO-UNDO.

    ASSIGN
      dtTime = NOW - (24 * iHour)
      iMsec = NOW - DATETIME-TZ(dtTime)
      fHours = iMsec / iHour.

    MESSAGE "A day earlier: " dtTime " "
            "Current hours since then: " fHours VIEW-AS ALERT-BOX.



Notes
•   To get the number of days between two DATETIME or DATETIME-TZ variable values, use the DATE function. For example:

      num-days = DATE(dt2) - DATE(dt1)


    This operation does not take the time portion into account.
    To ensure the correct result when working with two DATETIME-TZ values, convert one of the values to the time
    zone of the other. For example:

      ASSIGN
        temp-dttz           = dt1
        TIMEZONE(temp-dttz) = TIMEZONE(dt2)
        num-days            = DATE(dt2) - DATE(temp-dttz).


•   To subtract a specific number of days and milliseconds from a DATETIME, use the DATETIME function. For example:

      new-datetime = DATETIME( DATE(old-datetime) - days,
                               MTIME (old-datetime) - milliseconds ).


    The DATETIME function ensures the time portion remains within a valid range by borrowing a day from the date
    portion, when necessary.

   •   To subtract a specific number of days and milliseconds from a DATETIME-TZ, use the DATETIME-TZ function. For example:

           new-datetime-tz = DATETIME-TZ( DATE(old-datetime-tz) - days,
                                          MTIME (old-datetime-tz) - milliseconds,
                                          TIMEZONE(old-dateime-tz) ).


       The DATETIME-TZ function ensures the time portion remains within a valid range by borrowing a day from the
       date portion, when necessary.


  -= Subtraction assignment operator
   Subtracts a value from an ABL data element. Provides a shorter syntax for applying numeric and date-based subtraction.

   Syntax

       field -= expression [ NO-ERROR ]


   field -= expression is equivalent to field = field - (expression).
   Note: Spaces are required around the assignment operator. You cannot write field-=expression.
   Note: This syntax can also be used in the ASSIGN, BUFFER-COPY, SET, and UPDATE statements.
   field
                The name of an ABL data element from which you want to subtract the value of expression, and that
                is defined with a data type that is compatible with the data type of expression. Valid data types are
                INTEGER, INT64, DECIMAL, DATE, DATETIME, and DATETIME-TZ. The data element can
                include:
                •   A database or temp-table field
                •   A variable scoped to the current procedure, user-defined function, or method of a class, or an
                    accessible class-based variable data member, including a subscripted array variable
                •   A parameter defined for the current procedure, user-defined function, or method of a class, including
                    a subscripted array parameter
                •   A writable class-based or COM property, including a subscripted array property
                •   A writable handle attribute or system handle attribute
                •   ABL syntax that specifies the CURRENT-VALUE statement, DYNAMIC-CURRENT-VALUE
                    statement, DYNAMIC-PROPERTY statement, EXTENT statement, or LENGTH statement
   expression
                An expression with a data type that is consistent with the data type of field.
   NO-ERROR
                The NO-ERROR option on page 726 is used to prevent the statement from raising ERROR and displaying
                error messages. With the NO-ERROR option, if ERROR is raised, then the ABL element on the left-hand
                side of the assignment is unchanged.
  
Examples
The following example shows how to do integer subtraction using the -= assignment operator.

  VAR INT i1 = 100.
  VAR INT i2 = 25.

  i1 -= i2.       // 75

  /* Equivalent statement
  i1 = i1 - i2.        */


The following example uses the -= assignment operator on variables with mixed numeric data types.

  VAR INT64 i1 = 1000.
  VAR INT i2 = 100.
  VAR DECIMAL d1 = 20.5.

  i1 -= i2 + d1.         //    880

  /* Equivalent statement
  i1 = i1 - (i2 + d1). */


The following example uses the -= assignment operator to subtract 7 days from a DATE variable.

  VAR DATE date1 = 07/14/2020.

  date1 -= 7. // 07/07/2020

  /* Equivalent statement
  date1 = date1 - 7.   */


The following example uses the -= assignment operator to update a database field.

  VAR DECIMAL limitDecrease = 5000.

  FIND FIRST Customer.
  Customer.CreditLimit -= limitDecrease.

  /* Equivalent statement
  Customer.CreditLimit = Customer.CreditLimit - limitDecrease. */


The following example uses the -= assignment operator to update a class property:

  VAR ClassA myObj.
  VAR INT myValue = 10.

  myObj = NEW ClassA().
  myObj:MyIntProp = 250.
  myObj:MyIntProp -= myValue.               // 240

  /* Equivalent statement
  myObj:MyIntProp = myObj:MyIntProp - myValue. */
                                                                          

* Multiplication operator
   Multiplies two numeric expressions.

   Syntax

     expression * expression


   expression
                An expression with a numeric value.

   Example
   This procedure computes the value of the on-hand inventory for each item. If the on-hand inventory is negative, the
   procedure sets the inventory value to 0.
   r-mult.p

     DEFINE VARIABLE inv-value AS DECIMAL NO-UNDO LABEL "VALUE".

     FOR EACH Item NO-LOCK:
       inv-value = Item.OnHand * Item.Price.
       IF inv-value < 0 THEN
          inv-value = 0.
       DISPLAY Item.ItemNum Item.ItemName Item.OnHand Item.Price inv-value.
     END.



   Note
   Multiplying two decimal expressions produces a DECIMAL value. Multiplying two INTEGER expressions produces
   an INTEGER value. Multiplying two INT64 expressions produces an INT64 value. Multiplying an integer expression
   (INTEGER or INT64) and a decimal expression produces a DECIMAL value. Multiplying an INTEGER expression
   and an INT64 expression produces an INT64 value.

 
*= Multiplication assignment operator
   Multiplies an ABL data element by a numeric expression. Provides a shorter syntax for applying multiplication.

   Syntax

     field *= expression [ NO-ERROR ]


   field *= expression is equivalent to field = field * (expression).
                                                                                                  

Note: Spaces are required around the assignment operator. You cannot write field*=expression.
Note: This syntax can also be used in the ASSIGN, BUFFER-COPY, SET, and UPDATE statements.
field
             The name of an ABL data element by which you want to multiply the value of expression, and that is
             defined with a data type that is compatible with the data type of expression. Valid data types are
             INTEGER, INT64, and DECIMAL. The data element can include:
             •   A database or temp-table field
             •   A variable scoped to the current procedure, user-defined function, or method of a class, or an
                 accessible class-based variable data member, including a subscripted array variable
             •   A parameter defined for the current procedure, user-defined function, or method of a class, including
                 a subscripted array parameter
             •   A writable class-based or COM property, including a subscripted array property
             •   A writable handle attribute or system handle attribute
             •   ABL syntax that specifies the CURRENT-VALUE statement, DYNAMIC-CURRENT-VALUE
                 statement, DYNAMIC-PROPERTY statement, EXTENT statement, or LENGTH statement
expression
             An expression with a data type that is consistent with the data type of field.
NO-ERROR
             The NO-ERROR option on page 726 is used to prevent the statement from raising ERROR and displaying
             error messages. With the NO-ERROR option, if ERROR is raised, then the ABL element on the left-hand
             side of the assignment is unchanged.
Note: For more information on the rules related to assignment, see the notes section in the Assignment (=) statement
on page 74 reference entry.

Examples
The following example shows how to do integer multiplication using the *= assignment operator.

  VAR INT i1 = 100.
  VAR INT i2 = 50.

  i1 *= i2.         // 5000

  /* Equivalent statement
  i1 = i1 * i2.        */


The following example uses the *= assignment operator on variables with mixed numeric data types.

  VAR INT i1 = 10.
  VAR INT64 i2 = 1000.
  VAR DECIMAL d1 = 20.55.

  i1 *= i2 + d1.            // 10206

  /* Equivalent statement
  i1 = i1 * (i2 + d1). */


   The following example uses the *= assignment operator to update a database field.

     VAR DECIMAL limitIncrease = 1.10.

     FIND FIRST customer.
     Customer.CreditLimit *= limitIncrease.

     /* Equivalent statement
     Customer.CreditLimit = Customer.CreditLimit * limitIncrease. */


   The following example uses the *= assignment operator to update a class property:

     VAR ClassA myObj.
     VAR INT myValue = 10.

     myObj = NEW ClassA().
     myObj:MyIntProp = 250.
     myObj:MyIntProp *= myValue.                 // 2500

     /* Equivalent statement
     myObj:MyIntProp = myObj:MyIntProp * myValue. */



   / Division operator
   Divides one numeric expression by another numeric expression, producing a decimal result. This is the case for both
   INTEGER and INT64 expressions.

   Syntax

     expression / expression


   expression
                An expression that evaluates to a numeric value.

   Example
   This procedure divides the number of items allocated by the number of items on hand, producing a decimal value. The
   multiplication operator (*) converts that decimal value to a percentage.
   r-div.p

     DISPLAY "INVENTORY COMMITMENTS AS A PERCENT OF UNITS ON HAND".
     FOR EACH Item NO-LOCK:
       DISPLAY Item.ItemNum Item.ItemName Item.Allocated Item.OnHand
        (Item.Allocated / Item.OnHand) * 100 FORMAT ">>9" LABEL "PCT".
     END.
                                       

   Notes
   •   ABL always performs division as a decimal operation (the product of 5 / 2 is 2.5, not 2). If you assign the result to
       an integer field, ABL rounds the decimal to make the assignment. When you want ABL to truncate a quotient to an
       integer, use the TRUNCATE function (TRUNCATE(5 / 2, 0) is 2).
   •   The result of dividing a number by 0 is the Unknown value (?), and the AVM does not display an error message.

  /= Division assignment operator
   Divides an ABL data element by a numeric expression. Provides a shorter syntax for applying division.

   Syntax

       field /= expression [ NO-ERROR ]


   field /= expression is equivalent to field = field / (expression).
   Note: Spaces are required around the assignment operator. You cannot write field/=expression.
   Note: This syntax can also be used in the ASSIGN, BUFFER-COPY, SET, and UPDATE statements.
   field
                The name of an ABL data element by which you want to divide the value of expression, and that is
                defined with a data type that is compatible with the data type of expression. Valid data types are
                INTEGER, INT64, and DECIMAL. The data element can include:
                •   A database or temp-table field
                •   A variable scoped to the current procedure, user-defined function, or method of a class, or an
                    accessible class-based variable data member, including a subscripted array variable
                •   A parameter defined for the current procedure, user-defined function, or method of a class, including
                    a subscripted array parameter
                •   A writable class-based or COM property, including a subscripted array property
                •   A writable handle attribute or system handle attribute
                •   ABL syntax that specifies the CURRENT-VALUE statement, DYNAMIC-CURRENT-VALUE
                    statement, DYNAMIC-PROPERTY statement, EXTENT statement, or LENGTH statement
   expression
                An expression with a data type that is consistent with the data type of field.
   NO-ERROR
                The NO-ERROR option on page 726 is used to prevent the statement from raising ERROR and displaying
                error messages. With the NO-ERROR option, if ERROR is raised, then the ABL element on the left-hand
                side of the assignment is unchanged.
 
   Examples
   The following example shows how to do integer division using the /= assignment operator.

     VAR INT i1 = 100.
     VAR INT i2 = 50.

     i1 /= i2.       // 2

     /* Equivalent statement
     i1 = i1 / i2.        */


   The following example uses the /= assignment operator on variables with mixed numeric data types.

     VAR INT64 i1 = 1000.
     VAR INT i2 = 100.
     VAR DECIMAL d1 = 50.5.

     i1 /= i2 + d1.          // 7

     /* Equivalent statement
     i1 = i1 / (i2 + d1). */


   The following example uses the /= assignment operator to update a database field.

     VAR DECIMAL limitDecrease = 2.

     FIND FIRST customer.
     Customer.CreditLimit /= limitDecrease.

     /* Equivalent statement
     Customer.CreditLimit = Customer.CreditLimit / limitDecrease. */


   The following example uses the /= assignment operator to update a class property:

     VAR ClassA myObj.
     VAR INTEGER myValue = 10.

     myObj = NEW ClassA().
     myObj:MyIntProp = 250.
     myObj:MyIntProp /= myValue.                // 25

     /* Equivalent statement
     myObj:MyIntProp = myObj:MyIntProp / myValue. */


