CREATE CLIENT-PRINCIPAL statement
   Creates an instance of a client-principal object at run time in the INITIAL state (see the LOGIN-STATE attribute entry).
   Each client-principal instance is a security token that contains user credentials specific to one user login session. This
   login session can be used to set the user identity for one or more ABL sessions, one or more database connections, or
   an entire ABL application. This user identity must be defined in a security domain that is registered in a trusted domain
   registry that is used to authenticate or validate that identity.
   Note: You use a client-principal object with the SET-CLIENT( ) method or SET-DB-CLIENT function to set the user
   identity for an ABL session or OpenEdge database. You can set only one user identity at any one point in time for each
   ABL session or database connection. However, you can maintain multiple client-principal instances for any number of
   user identities that you need to set and maintain during an application.

   Syntax

       CREATE CLIENT-PRINCIPAL client-principal-handle
         [ IN WIDGET-POOL widget-pool-name]


   client-principal-handle
               A variable of type HANDLE that contains the handle to the client-principal object.
   IN WIDGET-POOL widget-pool-name
           An expression of type CHARACTER that evaluates, at run time, to the name of the widget pool in
           which the client-principal is created.
               Note: Widget pool names are not case sensitive.
   •   To use a client-principal object in the INITIAL state, you must set the required attributes to store the user's credentials
       and provide access to a domain registry that you trust to authenticate or validate the identity it represents for the
       ABL session or a database connection:

       •   The local domain registry for a database connection is automatically loaded by OpenEdge and available to verify
           any identity assigned to the connection. Using OpenEdge data administration tools, you can also configure the
           OpenEdge database to ignore its local domain registry after the initial connection is established, and use the ABL
           session domain registry to securely set its connection identity. This allows multiple database connections to share
           a single domain registry to validate and set their connection identities
       •   You can use the LOAD-DOMAINS( ) method on the SECURITY-POLICY system handle to load the ABL
           session domain registry from the local domain registry of a connected OpenEdge database. This automatically
           prevents the registration or loading of domains from outside the this database, but enables all database connections
           to share the same registry built from a single connected database. This method creates a session domain registry
           that can be used to authenticate or validate identity for both multi-tenant and non-multi-tenant database connections.
       •   If you have not already loaded the ABL session registry using LOAD-DOMAINS( ), you can use the
           REGISTER-DOMAIN( ) method on the SECURITY-POLICY system handle to register and load domains
           individually into the session domain registry. You can then prevent additional domains from being loaded into
           the session registry using the LOCK-REGISTRATION( ) method on the SECURITY-POLICY system handle.
           An ABL session domain registry loaded and locked using REGISTER-DOMAIN( ) and LOCK-REGISTRATION( )
           does not allow you to authenticate or validate identity for multi-tenant database connections. These methods only
           allow you to build a session domain registry that can be shared among non-multi-tenant database connections.
   •   If you do not specify a widget pool name, the object is created in the Session unnamed widget pool (not in the closest
       unnamed widget pool). 


ENCODE function
   Encodes a source character string and returns the encoded character string result.

   Syntax

       ENCODE ( expression )


   expression
                An expression that results in a character string value. If you use a constant, you must enclose it in
                quotation marks (" ").

   Example
   This procedure uses the ENCODE function to disguise a password that the user enters, and then displays the encoded
   password:
   r-encode.p

       DEFINE VARIABLE password      AS CHARACTER NO-UNDO FORMAT "x(16)".
       DEFINE VARIABLE id            AS CHARACTER NO-UNDO FORMAT "x(12)".
       DEFINE VARIABLE n-coded-p-wrd AS CHARACTER NO-UNDO FORMAT "x(16)".

       SET id LABEL "Enter user id" password LABEL
         "Enter password" BLANK WITH CENTERED SIDE-LABELS.

       n-coded-p-wrd = ENCODE(password).

       DISPLAY n-coded-p-wrd LABEL "Encoded password".



   Notes
   •   You can use the ENCODE function to encode a string that contains double-byte characters.
   •   The ENCODE function performs a one-way encoding operation that you cannot reverse. It is useful for storing
       scrambled copies of passwords in a database. It is impossible to determine the original password by examining the
       database. However, a procedure can prompt a user for a password, encode it, and compare the result with the stored,
       encoded password to determine if the user supplied the correct password.
   •   In order to ensure reliable results, the original encoding and any subsequent encoded comparisons must run in the
       same code page. In environments with multiple code pages, Progress Software Corporation strongly recommends
       that programs use the CODEPAGE-CONVERT function so that occurrences of the ENCODE function related to
       the same strings run in the same code page.
   •   The output of the ENCODE function is 16 characters long. Make sure the target field size is at least 16 characters
       long.


ENCRYPT function
   Converts source data into a particular format, and returns a MEMPTR containing the encrypted data (a binary byte
   stream).
   You must use the same cryptographic algorithm, initialization vector, and encryption key values to encrypt and decrypt
   the same data instance.

   Syntax

       ENCRYPT ( data-to-encrypt [ , encrypt-key [ , iv-value [ , algorithm
           [, tag [, aad ] ] ]]] )


   Note: The tag and aad parameters are applicable only to the AES_GCM_128, AES_GCM_192 and AES_GCM_256
   encryption algorithms. They are not applicable to other supported encryption algorithms.
   data-to-encrypt
              The source data to encrypt. The value may be of type CHARACTER, LONGCHAR, RAW, or
              MEMPTR.
   encrypt-key
              An optional RAW expression that evaluates to the name of the encryption key (a binary value) to use
              in encrypting the specified data. If you specify the Unknown value (?), the current value of the
              SYMMETRIC-ENCRYPTION-KEY attribute is used. If the value of the
              SYMMETRIC-ENCRYPTION-KEY attribute is also the Unknown value (?), the AVM generates a
              run-time error.
               You can generate this encryption key, based on the PKCS#5/RFC 2898 standard, by using either the
               GENERATE-PBE-KEY function on page 582 or the GENERATE-RANDOM-KEY function on page
               583.
               Note: If you use the GENERATE-RANDOM-KEY function to generate an encryption key, be sure to
               invoke the function before invoking the ENCRYPT function (not within the ENCRYPT function, which
               would render the key irretrievable).
               The AVM compares the size of the specified encryption key to the key size specified by the
               cryptographic algorithm. If the key sizes are inconsistent, the AVM generates a run-time error.
               You are responsible for generating, storing, and transporting this value.
   iv-value
               An optional RAW expression that evaluates to an initialization vector value to use with the specified
               encryption key in the encryption operation. Using an initialization vector value increases the strength
               of the specified encryption key (that is, it makes the key more unpredictable). If you specify the
               Unknown value (?), the current value of the SYMMETRIC-ENCRYPTION-IV attribute is used.
   algorithm
               An optional CHARACTER expression that evaluates to the name of the symmetric cryptographic
               algorithm to use in encrypting the specified data instance. If you specify the Unknown value (?), the
               current value of the SYMMETRIC-ENCRYPTION-ALGORITHM attribute is used.
               For a list the supported cryptographic algorithms, see the SYMMETRIC-SUPPORT attribute reference
               entry.
   tag (Authentication Tag)
              For AES_GCM encryption, a mandatory MEMPTR expression of a cryptographic checksum generated
              on the unencrypted data and additional authenticated data. It is designed to reveal both accidental
              errors and the intentional modification of the data.
   aad (Additional Authenticated Data)
              For AES_GCM encryption, an optional RAW expression of input data that is authenticated but not
              encrypted.


GENERATE-PBE-KEY function
   Generates a password-based encryption key, based on the PKCS#5/RFC 2898 standard, and returns the key as a RAW
   value.

   Syntax

       GENERATE-PBE-KEY( password[ , salt] )


   password
               The password (a binary value) to use in generating the encryption key. This value may be of type
               CHARACTER, LONGCHAR, RAW, or MEMPTR. If the password contains a CHARACTER or
               LONGCHAR value, the AVM converts it to UTF-8 (which ensures a consistent value regardless of
               code page settings) before using it to generate the encryption key. To avoid this automatic conversion,
               specify a RAW or MEMPTR value. If you specify the Unknown value (?), the result is the Unknown
               value (?).
   salt
               An optional RAW expression that evaluates to the salt value (a random series of 8 bytes) to use in
               generating the encryption key. If you specify the Unknown value (?), the current value of the
               ENCRYPTION-SALT attribute is used. If no salt value is specified in the ENCRYPTION-SALT
               attribute, no salt value is used.
               You can also use the GENERATE-PBE-SALT function to generate a salt value, which can help to
               ensure that the password key value is unique.
               If specified, this salt value is combined with the password value and hashed some number of times to
               generate a password-based encryption key (using the algorithm specified by the
               PBE-HASH-ALGORITHM attribute and the number of iterations specified by the PBE-KEY-ROUNDS
               attribute).

   Notes
   •   You are responsible for generating, storing, and transporting these values.
   •   The size of the generated encryption key is determined by the cryptographic algorithm specified by the
       SYMMETRIC-ENCRYPTION-ALGORITHM attribute.
   •   Before invoking this function, be sure to set the PBE-HASH-ALGORITHM attribute to the name of the hash algorithm
       to use.
   •   If you call this function multiple times with the same password string, hash algorithm, number of iterations, and salt
       value, the same binary key is generated each time.

 



GENERATE-PBE-SALT function
   Generates a random salt value (a series of 8 bytes) to use in generating an encryption key, and returns the salt value as
   a RAW value. Using a salt value can help to ensure that a password key value is unique.

   Syntax

       GENERATE-PBE-SALT


   Notes
   •   This salt value is combined with a password value and hashed some number of times to generate a password-based
       encryption key (using the algorithm specified by the PBE-HASH-ALGORITHM attribute and the number of iterations
       specified by the PBE-KEY-ROUNDS attribute).
   •   You are responsible for generating, storing, and transporting this value.

  
GENERATE-RANDOM-KEY function
   Generates a pseudorandom (rather than a truly random) series of bytes to use as an encryption key, and returns the key
   as a RAW value.

   Syntax

       GENERATE-RANDOM-KEY


   Notes
   •   You are responsible for generating, storing, and transporting this value.
   •   The size of the generated encryption key is determined by the cryptographic algorithm specified by the
       SYMMETRIC-ENCRYPTION-ALGORITHM attribute.
   •   The Alternate Random Number Generator (-rand) startup parameter setting has no effect on this function.


MD5-DIGEST function
   Hashes the specified data using the RSA Message Digest Hash Algorithm (MD5), and returns a 16-byte binary message
   digest value as a RAW value.

   Syntax

       MD5-DIGEST( data-to-hash[ , hash-key] )


   data-to-hash
              The source data to hash. The data may be of type CHARACTER, LONGCHAR, RAW, or MEMPTR.
              If the data is a CHARACTER or LONGCHAR value, the AVM converts it to UTF-8 (which ensures
              a consistent value regardless of code page settings). To avoid this automatic conversion, specify a
              RAW or MEMPTR value.
   hash-key
                An optional key value to use in the hash operation. The key may be of type CHARACTER,
                LONGCHAR, RAW, or MEMPTR. If the key is a CHARACTER or LONGCHAR value, the AVM
                converts it to UTF-8 (which ensures a consistent value regardless of code page settings). To avoid this
   automatic conversion, specify a RAW or MEMPTR value. This key value is combined with the source
                data before the hash operation begins.
                If either data-to-hash or hash-key is the Unknown value (?), then the Unknown value (?) is returned
                from the function.
                If the hash-key value contains a null character, the null character is included in the hash operation.
   Note: This function can be used for backward compatibility but should not be used in new development.


SETUSERID function

Authenticates a user identity for a specified database connection, verifying that the user ID and password supplied to
   the SETUSERID function match a user account in the _User table of the database. (This restriction does not apply to
   authentication with an STS-enabled database. See notes below for more information.) If they match, the database
   connection is set to the specified user identity and the function returns a TRUE value. If the database is multi-tenant, is
   also sets the user's tenancy.
   If the user ID is not in the _User table or the password is incorrect, SETUSERID returns a FALSE value and does not
   assign the user identity to the database connection. You can also check the ERROR-STATUS system handle for any
   messages returned.
   Note:
   Using this function overrides user identity previously set for the database connection by either the
   SECURITY-POLICY:SET-CLIENT( ) method or the SET-DB-CLIENT function on page 948.
   This function authenticates user identities only against user accounts defined in the _User table of a connected OpenEdge
   RDBMS. To authenticate against additional OpenEdge-supported and application-defined authentication systems, use
   the SET-CLIENT( ) method or the SET-DB-CLIENT function, instead.

   Syntax

       SETUSERID ( userid , password [ , logical-dbname] )


   userid
               A literal value, field name, variable name, or expression that results in a character value that represents
               the user's user ID. If you use a literal value, you must enclose it in quotation marks ("").
               If the user is defined in a non-default domain, this value must be a fully qualified user ID, including
               both the non-qualified user ID and domain separated by a domain delimiter (@). If the user is defined
               in the default (blank) domain, only a non-qualified user ID (without a domain delimiter) must be
               specified. For more information on specifying a fully qualified user ID, see the reference entry for the
               QUALIFIED-USER-ID attribute.
               Note: The default blank domain provides backward compatibility with OpenEdge releases that do
               not support domains as part of a user's identity.
   password
               A literal value, field name, variable name, or other character expression that results in a character
               value that represents the user's password. If you use a literal value, you must enclose it in quotation
               marks ("").
            Alternatively, you can encrypt the password using the ENCRYPT-AUDIT-MAC-KEY( ) method. For
            more information, see the topics on encrypted passwords in OpenEdge Programming Interfaces.
logical-dbname
           The logical name of the database on whose connection you want to check and set the user identity.
           The logical database name must be a character string enclosed in quotes, or a character expression. If
           you do not specify this argument, the compiler inserts the name of the database that is connected when
           the procedure is compiled. If you omit this argument and more than one database is connected, ABL
           raises an error.

Notes
•   Within a transaction on a:
    •   Multi-tenant database — Any attempt to set an identity for the connection that changes the current database
        tenancy raises a run-time error.
    •   Non-multi-tenant database — As a best practice, Progress Software recommends that you not set a new identity
        for the connection.
•   To assign a user identity while making a database connection, use the CONNECT statement on page 199.
•   After a user identity is set for a database connection, the AVM uses that identity to determine if the user has permission
    to access tables and fields in that particular database.
•   This function has the following restrictions:
    •   It does not generate any audit events, such as for login and logout.
    •   It can change the user identity for only one database connection at a time.
    •   The domain of the user identity you want to set must be configured to use the authentication system,
        _oeusertable.
    •   The domain of the user identity you want to set must be enabled in the _User table of the connected database.
    Note: When using an STS-enabled database, the _oeusertable authentication system is not required, and
    accounts do not have to be in the _User table.
•   Under the following conditions, the SETUSERID function returns a value of FALSE and does not assign a user
    identity to the user:
    •   There are no entries in the _User table.
    •   There is no _User record with the same user ID as the one supplied with the SETUSERID function.
    •   The password supplied with the SETUSERID function does not match the password in the _User table record
        of the specified user ID.
•   When using the SETUSERID function, ABL returns a compiler error under the following conditions:
    •   There is no database connected.
    •   The logical-dbname argument is omitted, and more than one database is currently connected.
•   When specifying the logical-dbname argument, you must provide the name of the logical database, not the physical
    database.
•   SETUSERID encodes the password argument and then compares the result with the value stored in the
    _User._password field of the _User table.
•   After SETUSERID returns a value of TRUE and assigns the authenticated user ID to a database connection:
    •   ABL uses that user ID when the user compiles procedures.
    •   Subsequent invocations of the USERID function for the same database connection return the assigned user ID.
•   If the root user ID does not exist in the _User table, SETUSERID returns a value of FALSE when supplied with a
    userid of root. If the _User table does have a root entry, the user who assumes that user ID has all the privileges
    associated with the root user ID on UNIX.
•   You must create and enable a blank user ID ("") if you want to set the user ID to a null value.
•   Once an initial database connection is established, you can also use the SET-CLIENT( ) method (on the
       SECURITY-POLICY system handle) or the SET-DB-CLIENT function to set the user identity for the
       connection.
   •   Any database connection whose user identity is set using this function locks out the SET-CLIENT( ) method from
       setting an identity for that connection. To unlock and allow the SET-CLIENT( ) method to set the identity for a
       locked database connection, call the SET-DB-CLIENT function for the connection, passing the Unknown value (?)
       for its client-principal-handle parameter. This unlocking of a database connection leaves the current connection
       identity unchanged.
   •   For each user identity authenticated by the SETUSERID function, the function creates a sealed security token
       containing the user credentials for the database connection, which you can return as a client-principal object using
       the GET-DB-CLIENT function. You can then use this sealed client-principal in a single sign-on (SSO)
       operation to set the identity of another database connection or ABL session.
   •   This function returns FALSE and with messages returned in the ERROR-STATUS system handle if:
       •   The format of the non-qualified user ID or domain name is invalid or the value has contains characters outside
           of the restricted user ID or domain name character sets (see the QUALIFIED-USER-ID attribute entry)
       •   Multiple databases are connected and logical-dbname is not passed or resolves to the Unknown value (?)
       •   Multiple databases are connected and logical-dbname does not refer to a connected database
   •   This function does not attempt set the connection identity for the foreign data source of a DataServer connection.
       However, it does attempt to set the connection identity for the OpenEdge schema holder database.



SHA1-DIGEST function
   Hashes the specified data using the United States Government Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA-1), and returns a 20-byte
   binary message digest value as a RAW value.

   Syntax

       SHA1-DIGEST( data-to-hash[ , hash-key] )


   data-to-hash
              The source data to hash. The data may be of type CHARACTER, LONGCHAR, RAW, or MEMPTR.
              If the data is a CHARACTER or LONGCHAR value, the AVM converts it to UTF-8 (which ensures
              a consistent value regardless of code page settings). To avoid this automatic conversion, specify a
              RAW or MEMPTR value.
   hash-key
               An optional key value to use in the hash operation. The key may be of type CHARACTER,
               LONGCHAR, RAW, or MEMPTR. If the key is a CHARACTER or LONGCHAR value, the AVM
               converts it to UTF-8 (which ensures a consistent value regardless of code page settings). To avoid this
               automatic conversion, specify a RAW or MEMPTR value. This key value is combined with the source
               data before the hash operation begins.
               If either data-to-hash or hash-key is the Unknown value (?), then the Unknown value (?) is returned
               from the function.
               If the hash-key value contains a null character, the null character is included in the hash operation.

   Note: This function is not compatible with HMAC-SHA-1.


USERID function
   Returns a character string representing the user ID for the specified database connection identity.

   Syntax

       USERID [ ( logical-dbname ) ]


   logical-dbname
                The logical name of the database from whose connection identity you want to retrieve the user ID.
                The logical database name must be a character string enclosed in quotes, or a character expression. If
                you do not specify this argument, the compiler inserts the name of the database that is connected when
                the procedure is compiled. If you omit this argument and more than one database is connected, ABL
                raises an error.

   Example
   This one-line procedure displays the current user ID for the database with the DICTDB alias:
   r-userid.p

       DISPLAY USERID("DICTDB") LABEL "You are logged in as" WITH SIDE-LABELS.



   Notes
   •   The user ID returned by this function can be set for a database connection identity that is specified on the command
       line or when executing the CONNECT statement on page 199, the SECURITY-POLICY:SET-CLIENT( ) method,
       the SET-DB-CLIENT function on page 948, or the SETUSERID function on page 955.
   •   For a single-tenant database connection, the user ID returned by the USERID function is non-qualified; for a
       multi-tenant database connection, it is fully qualified, as shown in the following table.
       Table 63: Values returned from the USERID function

        This value is returned...                      For...
        ""                                             A non-qualified user ID for the blank user name in the blank domain
        "user-name"                                    A non-qualified user ID for a specific user name in the blank domain
        "@domain-name"                                 A fully qualified user ID for the blank user name in a specific domain
        "user-name@domain-name"                        A fully qualified user ID for a specific user in a specific domain


       The user ID returned by this function is always consistent with the user ID used in database identity audit trails, as
       well as for applying ABL table and field permissions and ABL Security Administrator rights.
   •   When using the USERID function, ABL returns a compiler error under the following conditions:
       •   There is no database connected
       •   You omit the logical-dbname argument and more than one database is currently connected
   •   When specifying the logical-dbname argument, you must provide the name of the logical database, not the physical
       database.
   •   After ABL starts running, you can use the SET-CLIENT( ) method, the SET-DB-CLIENT function, or the
       SETUSERID function to change the current user ID associated with an existing database connection.
   •   ABL user IDs in _User table accounts are case insensitive.
